---
Title: The City-Transportation Relationship
Author: Vukan R Vuchic
Year: 2017
Added in:		2022-05-26
tag:			Article_
group:			group
fullref: 		""
status:			Need to extract
---

# Tittle 
```ad-quote
An understanding of the basic role of transportation in urban areas is essential to the use of the systems approach that needs to be taken in planning urban transportation. Urban transportation modes such as the bicycle, car, bus, or train vary greatly in their performance, the level of service offered, and, most important, ability to attract passengers. The basic classification of urban transportation systems is functional, that is, on the basis of their type of use, their availability to travelers, and the type of service provided. Each of the following categories—private, public transport, and for-hire (paratransit) — has distinctive characteristics and a particular role in cities. When a large volume of traffic is concentrated in urban areas, streets become congested, thus defeating the potentially high mobility of cars. The concept of individual equilibrium and social optimum is fundamental to determining rational urban transportation policies.
```
### Author's keywords
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
### Concepts
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
## Tags
#tag
[[@vuchicCityTransportationRelationship2017]]
```ad-abstract
text
```

## Bullet points
1. Page 1
2. The types of transportation systems, in tum, influence the growth, characteristj.cs, and environment of the cities and metropolitan areas. Thus, there is continuous interaction between the city, on one side, and its transportation system, which consists of the infrastructure and the operation of its different modes, on the other.
3. The serious transportation problems many cities face are largely the result of policies and planning that failed to take into account the long term relationship that exists between a city and its transportation.
4. transportation policies often neglect the needs of the great variety of activities and groups of urban residents that have a stake in the outcome.
5. An understanding of the basic role of transportation in urban areas is essential to the use of the systems approach that needs to be taken in planning urban transportation. This role depends on the different systems and modes involved, on their immediate impact on facilities, as well as their long-term impact on cities -in other words, on the urban environment and desired quality of life.
6. Page 2
7. Transit systems, with their greater capacity, make higher-density development feasible because transit and walking can serve the high volume of people generated by such developments.
8. In a transportation system designed to be car-oriented, buildings are likely to be separated by considerable distances to provide for roads and parking, and this makes walking less attractive and even difficult. Neglect of pedestrians makes urban areas less safe and the use of transit less convenient.
9. the selection of transportation modes- specifically, the respective roles given transit, cars, bicycles, and pedestrians - is an extremely important decision in determining the character of, and quality of life in, urban areas.
10. Page 3
11. Inadequate understanding of the role and impacts of urban transportation systems has often led to confusion in transportation planning. For example, several theoretical analyses of hypothetical cities, using minimum cost as the only criterion, have been made to compare different modes of transportation.
12. The complexity of selecting transportation systems and modes for each urban area is often underestimated. Incremental decisions are frequently made to provide solutions to immediate problems that may not lead to long-range efficiency of the transportation system.
13. Page 4
14. In North America, the number of metropolitan areas with rail transit has nearly tripled since publication of their book. The success and positive impacts of BART in San Francisco, Metro in Washington, and the San Diego Trolley are so clear that the perennial academic critics of these systems have become lonely voices.
15. Real-world problems are more complex. Comparison of multidimensional systems cannot be done on a two-dimensional diagram of costs versus travel volume.
16. ... an incorrect methodology for comparison of modes, combined with the biases of people who emotionally favor a single mode (in this case, the car) because they fail to understand the more complicated but far superior concept of multimodalsystems.
17. In the terminology of economists, modes differ not only in their supply but in their demand characteristics as well. In planning new transportation systems and selecting among modes, one must carefully consider the differences in their attraction of users passengers, as well as their short- and long-term impacts.
18. There is often a tendency to search for solutions to urban transportation problems in exotic technology. For decades, monorails provided the image of a "system of the future." So far, however, they have remained only that- a system of the future- because rail transit systems are superior to them in virtually all applications.
19. Comparison of such fundamentally different modes as rapid transit, buses, and cars by cost alone disregards some of the most important goals and criteria that must be included in transportation planning. With such a methodology, studies searching for the "lowest cost" mode often find that buses are "better" than rail transit, or that unregulated jitneys are "more efficient" than buses.
20. Page 5
21. The confusing claims and conflicting actions about different transport modes and the role of different transportation technologies would not be so prevalent if the city-transportation interaction were better known, if problems were correctly diagnosed, and if the characteristics of different modes were properly understood. Toward this end, a brief but systematic review of the family of urban passenger transportation modes is presented.
22. Walking, or pedestrian traffic, represents the basic, ubiquitous mode of travel that is by far the most efficient means of transport for short-distance trips. A Walking is more convenient, cheaper, and usually faster than any vehicular trip for travel up to 400 meters (1,300 feet). In attractive areas, people walk much greater distances. The major limitations of walking are low speed, effort required (particularly on hilly terrain), obstacles in areas where pedestrian traffic is neglected, and inconvenience of walking in inclement or extreme weather conditions.
23. Page 6
24. Bicycle transportation is the most economical vehicular mode of transportation. It is far less comfortable than the car, it requires effort on the rider's part,
25. The highway transportation system consists of networks and facilities (roads and streets) that can be classified in three categories:
	1. **Category C-** urban streets, which serve primarily local traffic accessing the served area;
	2. **Category B**- arterials, some of which are partially grade separated multilane roadways serving mostly through traffic; and
	3. **Category A**-freeways or divided, controlled-access highways, which serve only through traffic.
26. Page 7
27. The private car gives its user great personal convenience and independence in time and direction of travel, short travel time, and personal comfort. These advantages make the car an extremely attractive mode, particularly for individual users, families, and small groups. As a system, however, the auto/highway mode is limited in its urban applications. It causes congestion at relatively low traffic volumes (atraffic lane on a local or an arterial street reaches congestion when cars on it carry between 700 and 1,400 persons per hour). Its social cost, created by congestion and negative environmental impacts, can be high, especially in urban areas. Its average energy consumption per person-kilometer (-mile) is much higher than that for any other mode. Finally, highway accidents lead to large social and personal costs.
28. Page 8
29. In heavily auto-dependent cities such as Detroit and Houston, the gap in mobility between car users and non-car users is extremely large. The third category above is the truly disadvantaged. People who are, by choice, non-car owners, and those who choose to use transit, are an extremely small group in these cities, because it is seldom convenient to use transit and to walk safely in cities totally adapted to cars.
30. Among nondrivers, many use automobiles indirectly-for example, children driven by parents. Although chauffeuring is an "American tradition," from a systems point of view, it represents an extremely inefficient mode of transportation.
31. As a public system, transit is open and available to most of the population, rather than only to vehicle owners.
32. For every kilometer the person (child) had to travel, two VKTs were driven. Obviously, the energy consumption, as well as all negative impacts of VKT for this type of transport, are extremely high. This is in addition to the time and effort the mother devoted to chauffeuring.
33. Transit hasfar greater transporting capacity, lower area requirements, and fewer negative side effects per passenger trip than does the auto/highway system. Therefore, it is better suited than cars to meet the demand for high-density travel that exists in medium-size and large cities.
34. Transit has numerous, different roles in metropolitan areas, from transporting children to schools to serving as a distributor for intercity bus, rail, and air travel to and from terminals, to carrying commuters to work.
35. One is to serve mostly "transit captives"-people with no access to cars and those who cannot drive or who choose not to drive.
36. Page 9
37. Another role of transit is to serve as a convenient and competitive carrier for "choice riders" -those who have access to private vehicles but find transit equally or more attractive on the basis of travel time, cost, convenience, and other features.
38. One of the fundamental characteristics of a city should be the ability to travel conveniently without having to own or operate a car.
39. it makes far fewer demands on the urban environment: it produces fewer air pollutants, consumes less energy, and uses less space per trip than the car.
40. Transit represents the only transportation system that makes it possible to have large cities that both function efficiently and have human character.
41. A review of cities worldwide shows that cities that are economically strong, socially healthy, and livable are not auto-based; they have multimodal transportation that includes extensive and efficient transit systems (Newman and Kenworthy 1989a; Newman, Kenworthy, and Robinson 1992). They also have extensive and attractive facilities for pedestrians.
42. Page 10
43. These characteristics are, to some extent, interdependent. Technology depends heavily on the type of ways or paths on which a transit system operates;
44. The attractiveness to passengers, effectiveness, and economic efficiency of transit systems greatly depend on utilization of the most appropriate transit modes for each particular application. For any set of operating conditions, it is necessary to consider one or several modes that provide the appropriate "performance/investment package" (that is, offer required service for an appropriate level of expenditures).
45. Because the investment cost of a transit system increases sharply with the degree of separation, it is logical that, with higher-quality ROW (partially or fully separated), higher-performance technologies be used.
46. It is common to classify transit modes by their vehicles and technology-for example, bus, trolleybus, rail, or monorail. People have long been familiar with buses, streetcars/trams, metros, and cable cars. In recent decades, however, there have been numerous inventions and developments of transit systems, not only in vehicular technology but also in system designs and operational concepts.
47. Buses can also be used successfully on partially or fully separated ROW, as is the case on a sizeable network of busways in, for example, Ottawa and Curitiba (Brazil); on an 0-Bahn (guided bus) line in Adelaide (Australia); and an exclusive trolleybus tunnel in Seattle.
48. These lines and systems have the advantage of lower investment than would be required for full separation of the entire line, rail systems have been built with mostly, although not fully, separated rights-of-way (ROW). Separated tracks allow use of higher capacity vehicles, much higher operating speeds, reliability, and greater comfort than streetcars or buses can provide in mixed street traffic.
49. The same concepts of rapid and semirapid transit modes apply to rail systems. Many LRT systems have extensive sections of fully separated ROW-at-grade (Calgary and St. Louis), aerial (Cologne and San Diego),or in tunnels (Boston and Frankfurt). Yet, because these systems are not fully separated over entire lines and cannot take full advantage of such ROW,
50. Transit systems and modes are defined by three basic characteristics:
	1. Type or category ofROW;
	2. Technology (mainly, highway or rail vehicles);_and
	3. Type ofoperation (local, express, special)(Vuchic 1981)
51. Page 11
52. **Category B**. This category of ROW is partially separated. Typically, transit tracks (or, sometimes, lanes) are placed in a strip of land, such as a curbed street median, physically separated from other traffic. Because of its significance, it is important to define ROW types. Right-of-way, according to Vuchic (1981), is classified into three categories- C, B, and A.
53. **Category C**. This category consists of streets or roads with mixed traffic. It requires little, if any, investment. Generally, however, transit services in this category are not competitive with auto travel with respect to speed and reliability: transit vehicles travel together with cars, but they are delayed by having to stop for passengers.
54. **Category A**. This ROW category is fully separated and used by transit vehicles or trains only. It requires very high investment for construction of its aerial structures, tunnels, separated stations, and other infrastructure.
55. Page 12
56. Consequently, transit modes with ROW categoryA- that is, rapid transit or metro systems-offer the highest "performance/investment package" among all transit modes. With their high service quality and distinct lines and stations, they are competitive with car travel and attract considerably higher ridership than street transit modes, ceteris paribus.
57. The specific vehicle-way technology- minibus, articulated bus, LRT, AGT, or others - actually is a secondary decision in the choice of modes.
58. Technology is largely a technical consequence of ROW category and performance requirements-for example, needed capacity, comfort, speed, safety, and operating cost.
59. Page 13
60. An important classification of transit services is one that is based on the type of trips they serve and the role they play in urban transportaiton. Two major categories are defined, regular transit and commuter transit.
61. Regular transit offers services on an integrated network, usually consisting of numerous lines and different modes, with convenient transferring. This basic transit category serves travel throughout the urba1:- area(the"many-to-many" pattern shown in figure 2.2a), from early mornm tolate evening. This is the basic transit service that all groups of population can use for any trip purpose they need.
62. Commuter transit provides service exclusively for commuters traveling between suburban areas and the city center or other major activity centers.
63. Thus, it provides "many-to-one" and "one-to-many" types of travel during the morning and afternoon commuting hours, respectively (figure 2.2b).
64. **Commuter transit supplements regular transit. Usually it is provided by bus lines operating during peak hours only, often in unidirectional, high occupancy-vehicle (HOV) lanes,**
65. Page 14
66. Lack of high-quality regular transit services places a hardship on such population groups as teenagers, the elderly, tourists, choice transit riders, and others; it also leads to serious environmental deterioration in the urban area. Consequently, large cities that rely on cars and commuter transit only are at a serious competitive disadvantage in comparison with cities that have good regular transit services, even if the car has a dominant role.
67. Page 20
69. In urban transportation, similar to human behavior in many other respects, there is a significant difference between the choice of travel mode individuals make as their own optima and the distribution of passengers among modes that results in operating the most efficient system- the social optimum.
70. In most situations, every person selects a travel mode that offers him or her travel at the lowest cost, or, more precisely, lowest disutility consisting of travel time, cost, reliability, safety, and other elements. The condition resulting from such individual choices is designated as "individual equilibrium" (IE).
71. Page 21
72. Two sets of policies and measures can be used, preferably in a coordinated manner, to achieve this goal:
73. Transit incentives. A set of measures that result in decreased disutility of transit travel, such as increased frequency of service, reliability, comfort, lower fares, and construction of a higher quality transit mode.
74. Auto disincentives. Measures that increase monetary costs or decrease the convenience of auto travel, such as higher gasoline taxes, parking charges, limitations on street and parking capacity.
75. Page 22
76. Because of these implementation difficulties, even some effective measures have been eliminated after their implementation, due to pressures from drivers of single-occupancy vehicles (SOVs),
77. The concept of individual equilibrium (IE) and social optimum (SO) is fundamental to determining rational urban transportation policies. Urban transportation systems operations based on IE are much less efficient and cause more serious negative impacts than their operations at SO travel distribution. Yet, despite its importance, this concept is generally unknown, not only to the public but to many professionals as well.
78. Page 31
79. THE FOUR LEVELS OF TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
80. The description of various physical, operational, and policy aspects of cities and their transportation systems in the preceding sections indicates that most current problems are created by a failure to understand transportation as a system that interacts with most other activities in cities.
81. Planning, organization, and operation of urban transportation can be classified by its objects, scope, and domain into four levels, from individual system elements to the overall city/urban area level. The four levels, shown schematically in figure 2.14, are:
	1. Level IV: Individual Facilities such as a boulevard, intersection, pedestrian area, or bus line;
	2. Level III: Single Mode Network or System for example, a street network, network of bicycle lanes, or regional rail system;
	3. Level II: Multimodal Coordinated System which incorporates streets and freeways, different transit modes, pedestrian zones, and the like; and
	4. Level I: City-Transport Relationshipor coordination between the transportation system and the city, its physical components and all other functions, such as economy, housing, social conditions, and myriad others (the highest level of planning and operational integration).
82. Page 32
83. This classification of urban transportation planning can provide in sight into its scope and organization.
84. The long-range impacts on the city of individual modes or their combinations are analyzed at this level. In general, transit systems tend to create conditions for concentrated activities, while an auto/highway system influences predominantly the dispersal of activities, as shown in the diagram.
85. Page 33
86. **SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS**
87. This classification can also be used to gain a proper perspective on the overall handling of urban transportation and its role in cities. If planning focuses on individual facilities (Level IV) while their interactions with other modes and their impacts on the city (Levels III, II, a,nd I) are not considered, such a transportation system may stimulate urban development that is neither efficient nor livable. This sequence of planning, based on Level IV, has been the cause of many problems and conflicts between transportation and cities.
88. Transportation must be considered a system that is integrated with diverse activities in metropolitan areas. To serve these activities, transportation service must be efficient and available to all subgroups of the population.
89. Page 34
90. No single mode of transportation can satisfy the diverse needs of a metropolitan area. To provide diversity in service types, capacities, speeds, and other elements, particularly in medium and large-size metropolitan areas, a transportation system must consist of a set of complementary modes including private, public, and paratransit systems.
91. Metropolitan areas with balanced multimodal transportation pedestrian, car, and transit- are superior to those served by only one mode, be it paratransit (in some developing countries), transit (in countries with low car ownership), or car (many recently developed North American urbanized areas). The advantages of multimodal over unimodal systems are numerous. They require lower investment and operating costs. Every person has mobility. Their physical environment is human-based. And they allow both privacy and diverse social activities.
92. There are two types of distribution of travel among transportation facilities or modes. Individual equilibrium, based on individual travelers' shorMerm choices, Transit also plays many roles, but in small cities its social service is dominant. In medium- and large-size cities transit be comes crucial. Its high capacity, efficiency, and low space requirements per person-km (-mile) allow different densities of development. Together with pedestrian traffic, transit ensures human character of the urban environment and enhances a city's overall efficiency and attractiveness.
93. Social optimum distribution results in lower average costs or disutilities for all travelers. In the case of distribution between cars and transit, a shift of a certain amount of travel from cars to transit would result inreduced costs to both car and transit users.
