---
Title: 			Beyond mobility: Planning cities for people and places
Author:	Cervero, R., Guerra, E., & Al
Year:			2017
Added in:		2022-06-29
tag:			Book_
fullref: 		"Cervero, R., Guerra, E., & Al, S. (2017). Beyond mobility: Planning cities for people and places. Island Press. [https://doi.org/10.5822/978-1-61091-835-0 LK - https://concordiauniversity.on.worldcat.org/oclc/1012851817](https://doi.org/10.5822/978-1-61091-835-0 LK - https://concordiauniversity.on.worldcat.org/oclc/1012851817)"
status:			Need to extract
---
# Tittle 
```ad-quote
Cervero, R., Guerra, E., & Al, S. (2017). _Beyond mobility: Planning cities for people and places_. Island Press. [https://doi.org/10.5822/978-1-61091-835-0 LK - https://concordiauniversity.on.worldcat.org/oclc/1012851817](https://doi.org/10.5822/978-1-61091-835-0 LK - https://concordiauniversity.on.worldcat.org/oclc/1012851817)
```
## Concepts
- [[transit oriented development]]
- [[walkability]]
- [[accessibility]]
## Tags
#tag 
#2022-06-29
#EXAM_2 

## Summary
```ad-info
color: 255, 215, 0
title: **Cities** across the globe have been designed with a primary goal of moving **people** around quickly--and the costs are becoming ever more apparent. The consequences are measured in smoggy air basins, sprawling suburbs, unsafe pedestrian environments, and despite hundreds of billions of dollars in investments, a failure to stem traffic congestion. Every year our current transportation paradigm generates more than 1.25 million fatalities directly through traffic collisions. Worldwide, 3.2 million **people** died prematurely in 2010 because of air pollution, four times as many as a decade earlier. Instead of **planning** primarily for **mobility**, our **cities** should focus on the safety, health, and access of the **people** in them. **Beyond** **Mobility** is about prioritizing the needs and aspirations of **people** and the creation of great **places**. This is as important, if not more important, than expediting movement. A stronger focus on accessibility and **place** creates better communities, environments, and economies. Rethinking how projects are planned and designed in **cities** and suburbs needs to occur at multiple geographic scales, from micro-designs (such as parklets), corridors (such as road-diets), and **city**-regions (such as an urban growth boundary). It can involve both software (a shift in policy) and hardware (a physical transformation). Moving **beyond** **mobility** must also be socially inclusive, a significant challenge in light of the price increases that typically result from creating higher quality urban spaces. There are many examples of communities across the globe working to create a seamless fit between transit and surrounding land uses, retrofit car-oriented suburbs, reclaim surplus or dangerous roadways for other activities, and revitalize neglected urban spaces like abandoned railways in urban centers. The authors draw on experiences and data from a range of **cities** and countries around the globe in making the case for moving **beyond** **mobility**. Throughout the book, they provide an optimistic outlook about the potential to transform **places** for the better. **Beyond** **Mobility** celebrates the growing demand for a shift in global thinking around **place** and **mobility** in creating better communities, environments, and economies
icon: book


```
## Bullet points
1. Page 17
2. Recalibration is a term found in handbooks for precision instruments and flight manuals. It has resonance in city planning circles as well. The roads, subdivisions, and utility corridors that give shape to cities were calibrated from engineering and design manuals with noble aims, such as minimizing accident risks and accommodating the turning radii of eight-wheel fire trucks, but with little attention to unintended consequences. The consequence: a vicious cycle of road expansions to accommodate car traffic rather than channeling more resources into modes that are efficient users of road space, such as public transit and cycling.
3. Over the twentieth century, street widths and parking standards continually increased, taking up the majority of public space to accommodate cars.1 In some cities, parking lots alone account for more than a third of the metropolitan footprint.2 The approaches, metrics, and standards used to design cities, we believe, are in serious need of recalibration—not necessarily a seismic shift but rather a rebalancing of priorities that gives at least as much urban planning and community design attention to serving people and places as to mobility.
4. Page 18
5. An apt analogy on getting the priorities right is the design of a house. Think of “place” as the house and “transportation” as its utilities. In conceptualizing and planning a house, prospective homeowners dwell on what matters most to them: the layout, floor plan, architectural styles, kitchen designs, views, and so on. Recalibrating the planning and design of cities, then, is about lifting the priority given to place vis-à-vis mobility.
6. In emphasizing mobility, twentieth-century transportation infrastructure has often had harmful effects on people and places. Dangerous and difficult-to-cross intersections and multilane roads have hindered people’s ability to move freely and children’s opportunities to play. Although transportation investments have connected people on a regional level, they have also uprooted communities and lowered home values, epitomized by highways cutting through American neighborhoods in the 1950s and 1960s.
7. Page 19
8. Accessibility is about the ease of reaching places where people want to go. A vast body of research shows that the resulting mixed land use patterns can shorten distances and invite more leisurely paced, pollution-free travel. It’s been said that planning for the automobile city focuses on saving time. Planning for the accessible city focuses on time well spent.
9. Page 21
10. Cities are the social, cultural, and economic hubs of human activity—“our greatest achievement” in the words of Ed Glaeser in the Triumph of the City.5 Today, the world’s 600 largest cities, representing a fifth of the world’s population, generate 60 percent of global gross domestic product (GDP).7 Cities are also home to the majority of the world’s population and ground zero of global population growth.
11. Page 22
12. It is difficult to overstate the importance of accessibility in making urban living more affordable and socially just. Across the globe, urban residents typically spend more on housing and transportation than all other goods combined.16 Poor access drains the few resources the poor have at their disposal. In Mexico City, the poorest fifth of households spend about a quarter of their income on public transit.17
13. Page 23
14. Despite the importance of cities and their inhabitants, too often the form, shape, and even culture of cities have become the unintended consequence of policies and investments to improve mobility. Truly transportation has become the tail that wags the dog. Putting people and place back at the center of how and why we invest in urban transportation is essential to improving humanity’s overall social, environmental, and economic well-being in the twenty-first century. The reordering of transportation planning priorities is but part of the motivation behind Beyond Mobility.
15. What do we mean by better communities, environments, and economies? Better communities are safe, walkable, healthy places that promote sustainable and equitable access to a wealth of destinations by multiple modes and strengthen interpersonal connections and community interactions.
16. Page 24
17. ... better environments are clear, measurable, and directly attributable to the shape of cities and the design of transportation networks. Car-dependent cities and countries consume substantially more land, fossil fuels, and natural habitat than more compact and multimodal places. In fact, moving beyond mobility can improve economic performance—not just through reduced collisions, fatalities, pollution, and infrastructure expenditures but also by bringing people closer together and creating the types of places that are most attractive to the most productive and mobile workers.
18. Walkable, transit-accessible neighborhoods with well-designed urban environments are desirable and fetch a price premium. Real estate companies have started to report metrics on walkability alongside more traditional information such as size, number of bedrooms, school district, and proximity to major roads and transit lines. At the metropolitan scale, lower vehicle travel per capita is often associated with higher GDP per capita.24 Nevertheless, car ownership and car use—not to mention road-based freight delivery—are important components of urban life.
19. The goal of Beyond Mobility is not to wage a war on the car but to put it in its proper place as one of many tools to improve cities for their residents. Urban recalibration—elevating the importance of people and places vis-à-vis mobility in the planning and design of cities—occurs at a variety of scales and contexts...
20. Page 25
21. Urban recalibration occurs in core cities through the reuse and revitalization of underused land, for instance in abandoned industrial parks and freight corridors.
22. Page 30
23. The idea of balancing is to design cities in ways that reduce wasteful travel and encourage judicious auto-mobility. It does not mean ceasing future road construction or ignoring the need for efficient freight logistics in industrial corridors.
24. Page 31
25. Better communities are safe, walkable, healthy places that promote sustainable and equitable access to a wealth of destinations by multiple modes and strengthen interpersonal connections and community interactions. Instead, we argue for the kinds of smaller, human-scaled blocks, shared spaces, and complete streets promoted by acclaimed scholars and practitioners such as Jane Jacob.
26. Page 35
27. Car-oriented places do not promote the accumulation of social capital. The car journey of the typical suburbanite from the bubble of the detached single-family home to office cubicle is marked by isolation, with limited possibilities to interact socially. Another feature of modern transportation systems that directly affects quality of urban living is the severance and disruption of communities. Roads that pierce the heart of longstanding communities can cut off traditional pathways and thus limit social interactions.
28. Page 36
29. The car has affected social interaction in cities as well. In his groundbreaking 1981 book Livable Streets, Donald Appleyard conducted a study in which he compared three streets of similar morphology and demographic makeup but with different vehicular traffic, ranging from 2,000 to 16,000 vehicles daily. In the street with a lower volume of car traffic, residents had on average three times more local connections than in the high traffic street.15
30. Page 37
31. Necessary activities, such as going to school and work, will always happen regardless of how public space functions. However, optional activities (sunbathing, stopping to talk) will happen only if the public space is good enough to accommodate them. In other words, mobility will happen regardless of sidewalks, but social interactions and associated increases in social capital may not. Physical characteristics that promote sociable cities on a neighborhood level include livable streets; a minimum density of residential development; a multitude of activities and resources for living including spaces to live, work, and play within a reasonable proximity to each other; and many buildings with distinct functions instead of just a few large buildings with complex functions.20
32. Page 38
33. Shared spaces epitomize how balancing mobility and place-making can benefit communities. The experiment reestablished interpersonal awareness between all road users and reclaimed streets for pedestrians, allowing them to move and interact with another in new ways. By deemphasizing vehicle throughput, curbless streets become destinations. Traffic calming and pedestrian safety measures can take other forms as well. Larger block sizes are known to promote faster automobile speeds, and shorter blocks with more stops will force drivers to move slower, thus reducing the severity of any collisions. Shorter blocks also promote walking, as Jane Jacobs mandated: “Streets and opportunities to turn corners must be frequent.”28
34. Page 40
35. All of the strategies included in this study included physical elements that could contribute to place-making, such as
	1. Vertical and horizontal shifts in traffic (e.g., road humps, mini-roundabouts, road narrowing)
	2. Optical measures (road surface treatment including color or texture), reduced horizontal visibility (shortened sightlines)
	3. Audible measures (rumble areas, jiggle bars)
	4. Redistribution of traffic (e.g., permanent or temporary blocking of road)
	5. Changes to road environment (increased vegetation along road, street furniture)
	6. Reduced speed limit zones where speeds are physically limited by traffic calming measures
36. Instead of focusing on allowing cars to travel as efficiently as possible, neighborhoods should have streets that are designed to make neighborhoods more livable to other users as well. The most comprehensive approach to benefit communities is the “complete streets” concept, a street designed for all users, not just for drivers, but also for bicyclists, transit users, and pedestrians of all ages and abilities.
37. Page 41
38. Planning almost exclusively around the automobile at the cost of pedestrians and other modes of travel has adversely affected public health. Walking rates have decreased dramatically in the United States: Walking’s share of urban trips fell from 9.3 percent in 1977 to 5.5 percent in 1995, according to the Federal Highway Administration.
39. Mixed-use and walkable areas are known to promote healthier communities.
40. Page 45
41. Place-making does not inherently make a community more equitable. For instance, the New Urbanist ideal of achieving compact cities through physical design fails to include social equity, accessibility, and political economy.55
42. Page 51
43. **Defining Sustainable Cities and Transport**
44. In urban planning circles, the term sustainability is rather common and often used quite loosely, so it is important to first define what is meant by this term.
45. Page 52
46. In the urban transport sector, sustainability can similarly be viewed in intergenerational terms, satisfying the current mobility needs of cities without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs for movement and spatial interaction.1
47. In recent times, the idea of sustainability in the urban transport sector has moved beyond a focus on ecology and the natural environment to also include economic, social, and institutional dimensions.
48. Page 59
49. Significant environmental benefits can accrue from a shift in focus away from mobility and more to places. Place-making that makes high-density living more attractive while promoting eco-friendly transport such as cycling—made more possible through compact growth—reduces energy consumption and tailpipe emissions through shortening of trips and modal shifts.
50. Page 60
51. pedestrian-friendly and transit-oriented growth produces environmental synergies.
52. Physical “hardware” measures can also combine with policy “software” measures to make a difference.
53. Page 64
54. The environmental agenda that is central to urban recalibration must not ignore the economic underpinnings of virtually all public choices. In market economies, consumers freely choose between competing goods and services so as to maximize personal well being, constrained by regulations and controls introduced by politicians and policymakers. Elected officials similarly seek to optimize their well-being, politically speaking, by appeasing their constituents. Often this means enacting policies that create jobs and increase incomes, even if air quality suffers as a result. Environmental initiatives, however well-intended, must operate in the context of contemporary political and economic realities.
55. Page 65
56. Making a convincing link between sustainable cities and economic performance is critical to moving the urban recalibration agenda forward. Demonstrating that walkable communities, transit-oriented development, and livable places can grow local economies, by itself, is probably not sufficient to gain sustained political support. However, the connection to economic benefits is indisputably a necessary precondition to bringing politicians on board. Translating such strategies into job formation, stepped-up private investments, attraction of new firms, increased labor productivity, and stronger real estate market performance will resonate more with politicians than metrics such as reductions in vehicle miles traveled (VMT), metric tons of carbon emissions, or acreage of farm land conversion.
57. Page 103
58. Suburbanization is a truly global phenomenon, fueled over the past half-century by modernization, motorization, and growing affluence of cities and their inhabitants. Also at play are the location-liberating effects of information technologies, the desire to escape central-city crime and congestion, and a general preference for more spacious, large-lot living as household incomes rise. Although the private car enabled retailers to spread out across metro areas, in truth it led to concentrations and consolidations of commercial activities, in the form of shopping plazas, big-box outlets, and indoor malls.
59. Page 104
60. Suburban workplaces have likewise struggled to become attractive destinations or noteworthy places, for the most part also a product of their automobile orientation. As superhighways opened up vast expanses of land for new development, workplaces began to stretch outward rather than upward. Their compact, mixed-use yet auto-oriented designs predictably resulted in edge cities experiencing some of the worst traffic conditions anywhere.
61. Over time, some observers began to characterize America’s suburban landscapes as mostly edgeless, marked by loose constellations of sprawling corporate enclaves, business parks, standalone office buildings, big-box retailers, and power centers.5
62. Page 105
63. Notwithstanding such trends and preferences, the reality is that a huge stock of automobile-oriented shopping centers, strip malls, and business parks continue to dot the suburbs of America and elsewhere. Are they simply to be boarded up and abandoned? Or might they be reimagined, reinvented, redesigned? One of the saving graces of huge surface parking lots is they can be easily torn up and rebuilt upon. They offer a clean slate of preassembled real estate that without too much in the way of demolition or relocation expenses can be redirected to other uses, presumably with more of a sense of place, less auto-centricity, and better connectivity.
64. ... suburban landscapes are malleable and for the most part can be easily adapted, modified, and reused. Adaptive reuse is gaining traction in the suburbs of America and beyond. A number of jobs-only land uses have been diversified in recent years, in the form of infill and densification, the addition of housing and retail uses, and the breaking up of superblocks through the construction of internal pathways and trail systems.
65. Page 125
66. Public transport is touted worldwide not only for its ability to relieve traffic congestion, reduce energy consumption, and cleanse the air but also for its ability to support sustainable patterns of urban development.1 One would be hard-pressed to find a policy document today on climate change, smart growth, or social inclusion that did not enthusiastically support expanding the role of public transit.
67. TODs embrace many of the same urban design features of all places that aim to promote more walking and transit riding and less driving: pedestrian-friendly designs such as safe and attractive sidewalks; small city blocks and a highly connected gridlike street network; mixed land uses that place many destinations close to each other, including small storefront ground-floor retail in commercial districts; sufficiently high densities to justify high-quality and frequent public transport services; and community hubs and civic places that promote social interaction and a sense of belonging. TODs thus are compact, mixed-use, highly walkable places that take advantage of being close to a major transit access point.
68. Page 126
69. TOD’s growing popularity lies in part in its broad appeal. If there is any place on the city map where nearly everyone agrees that it makes sense to concentrate urban growth, it is in and around rail stations and major transit stops. TOD is hardly a new idea. In the pre-automobile era of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, most urban development concentrated along streetcar and interurban rail corridors. Modern-day TODs create the kinds of neighborhoods found around transit stations 100-plus years ago.
70. Page 127
71. The economic drivers of large-scale clustered development around train and busway stops are often pent-up market demands for growth in employment sectors that benefit from agglomeration and spatial clustering (e.g., knowledge based industries and services).
72. Transit hubs are where such businesses naturally gravitate. Basic employment jobs in turn spawn business-serving subclusters as well as tertiary demand for housing, some of which can end up near transit stations. TOD typologies can be defined in terms of land uses (e.g., predominantly employment, predominantly residential, or balanced/mixed use), market catchments (e.g., regional, subregional/district, or community/neighborhood), development intensities (e.g., high-density, medium-density, low-rise), and market activity (e.g., strong, emerging, or static). For successful TOD to take shape, every station and its surroundings can and should be classified in terms of these four characteristics.
73. **Node versus Place**
74. If a transit station is to be more than a jumping-off point to catch a fast train or bus, its functional role should be defined along a spectrum of node versus place.
75. Page 128
76. Intermodal connections are inherently messy.
77. They are hardly people-oriented places where folks want to be; rather, most of us want to get out of stations and on to our intended destinations as quickly, safely, and efficiently as possible. As a place, a TOD can serve both functionally and symbolically as the centerpiece of a community. Here, form takes precedence over function. In terms of physical designs, architecture and urban planning subsume engineering. Place-oriented TODs emphasize the design qualities of all attractive, human-scale developments, places that are comfortable, memorable, legible, connected, engaging, and amenity-oriented and instill safety through natural surveillance and Jane Jacobs–style “eyes on the street.”
78. Making place oriented TODs affordable and inclusive is a particular challenge because urban amenities and high-end designs inevitably increase project costs. Development incentives, such as density bonuses and tax credits for including mixed-income housing and retail, are one way to promote affordable place-oriented TODs.
79. What nearby development that does take place is likely to be transit adjacent than transit-oriented (i.e., TAD, the “evil twin” of TOD). TADs are massings of buildings near major transit stops. TODs too have clustered buildings, but through thoughtful designs and attention to details they are also communities that instill a sense of place and identity, offer high-quality walking environments, have architectural integration, and provide attractive civic spaces.
80. Page 129
81. With limited institutional capacities and resources to conduct strategic planning, many cities designing and building TODs give little thought to the functional roles of specific stations.
82. Nodes of Access...Though not sufficient, being close to transit stops is a precondition of TOD.
83. A recent study by the Institute for Transportation Development and Policy (ITDP) showed that higher urban densities are associated with higher shares of residents living within 1 kilometer of high-quality transit (defined as urban rail and bus rapid transit [BRT]).9
84. Page 134
85. design guidelines can be a useful instrument for translating transit-oriented design principles to on-the-ground projects. Hundreds and hundreds of transit-supportive design guidelines have been prepared over the past quarter century that promote TOD. Past reviews of transit-supportive guidelines reveal that they address and set standards for key factors known to affect transit ridership and operations: land use densities, vehicle parking, sidewalk provisions, mixes of land uses, bicycle facilities, and pedestrian connectivity.19
86. Page 135
87. Design standards embraced by most transit agencies are often indistinguishable from those set by New Urbanists and other advocates of less car-oriented built environments.20 Typically, a grid of small, navigable city blocks with complete and interconnected networks of sidewalks and bikeways is called for. Mixed land uses and diversity are also promoted, not only to enliven and activate urban landscapes, as advocated by New Urbanists, but also to create “24/7” places that generate transit trips at night and on weekends.
88. ... suburban transit agencies face the stiffest challenges in creating built environments that are conducive to transit riding. Only recently have transit-oriented design manuals begun to address the more nuanced issue of place-making. This is partly because transit agencies (versus, say, design firms) have mostly produced guidelines, placing operational topics such as ease of bus turning maneuvers and access to bus stops above all else. This emphasis brings us back to the tension of stations as places versus nodes.
89. Page 137
90. In 2013, ITDP released The TOD Standard, a case-based, illustrative document aimed at promoting TODs that are highly walkable and that effectively integrate station areas with their surroundings. In effect, the document is TOD design guidelines aimed at a global audience.
	1. Walking: a public realm that is safe, complete, active, comfortable, and vibrant
	2. Cycling: a cycling network that is safe and complete, with ample and secure parking and storage
	3. Connectivity: walking and cycling routes that are short, direct, and varied, more so than driving routes
	4. Transit service: high-quality transit that is accessible by foot
	5. Mixed land uses: diverse and complementary land uses that shorten trip lengths
	6. Density: residential and job densities sufficient to support high-quality transit
	7. Compactness: developments that infill built-up areas and improve access to other transit hubs
	8. Shifting: land devoted to off- and on-street parking and driveways is reduced