---
Title: 			'Planning for public transport accessibility: An international sourcebook'
Author:	Curtis
Year:			2016
Added in:		2023-02-08
tag:			Book_
fullref: 		"Curtis, C., & Scheurer, J. (2016). _Planning for public transport accessibility: An international sourcebook_ (Vol. 1–1 online resource (xv, 310 pages) : color illustrations, color maps). Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group; WorldCat.org. [https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&AN=841698](https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&AN=841698)"
status:			Extracted
---
# Tittle 
```ad-quote
Curtis, C., & Scheurer, J. (2016). _Planning for public transport accessibility: An international sourcebook_ (Vol. 1–1 online resource (xv, 310 pages) : color illustrations, color maps). Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group; WorldCat.org. [https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&AN=841698](https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&AN=841698)
```
## Concepts
[[]]
## Tags
#tag 
#2023-02-08

## Summary
```ad-info
color: 255, 215, 0
title: summary
icon: book


```
## Bullet points
1. Page 2
2. Historically, planning for urban public transport has seen a number of phases (Schaeffer and Sclar, 1975). Each phase has been the result, on the one hand, of the transport modes available at that time and the urban development needs of the city, and on the other hand, the result of transport policy choices made by bureaucrats and elected officials.
3. Page 8
4. The starting point for developing an accessibility tool is to take the perspective of an everyday user of a city’s land use–transport system. Everyday users make, and are often constrained by, long-term decisions about where their everyday activities take place, for example, the location of home, workplace, schools and the homes of regular social contacts such as family members or close friends.
5. Everyday users are more likely to frequent activities and places that they perceive as convenient to access. 
6. On this basis we have established a set of tasks and measurements that highlight the challenge of land use–transport integration from a range of perspectives: 
7. What is the number of public transport services required to achieve an optimal level of accessibility across the network, noting that resources may be limited? 
8. What is the ease of movement offered on public transport across the city and for each route? Fast and/or frequent services reduce ‘spatial resistance’ to the user compared to slow and/or infrequent services. 
9. What is the transfer intensity of the network? While transfers are a necessary component of an integrated public transport network, is there a way of measuring whether their occurrence may be excessive or underdeveloped? 
10. What is the percentage of residents and employees within walking-distance to public transport services at a stand ard that allows for both planned and spontaneous trip making across most hours of the day, seven days a week?
11. Page 9
12. What is the geographical range users can cover by way of a public transport journey within a particular time frame, and how many destinations are located within this range? 
13. How does the public transport network channel concentrate and disperse the travel opportunities generated by the interplay of land uses and the transport system? Where on the network do these effects result in a potential mismatch between public transport supply and potential demand?
14. How well is each activity centre connected in order to attract stopovers on public transport chain journeys and encourage land use intensification to capitalise on such flows of people? 
15. Can the results of these indicators be calibrated to arrive at a comparative scale for public transport accessibility between different cities and within one city over a time line?
16. KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF SNAMUTS 
17. To analyse and quantify these different aspects of accessibility performance, Spatial Network Analysis for Multimodal Urban Transport Systems (SNAMUTS) has been developed as a GIS tool operating on a database that captures the configuration and service levels of the public transport network in question.
18. The core methodology of SNAMUTS has primarily been inspired by the Space Syntax theory (Hillier and Hanson, 1984) and by the Multiple Centrality Analysis tool (Porta et al, 2006a, 2006b).
19. Space Syntax investigates the organising principles within built environments or movement networks and their inherent patterns of relationships. 
20. Among the resulting categories is the distinction of convex (topological) and metric shapes, a dichotomy that also constitutes the Multiple Centrality Analysis methodology as primal and dual graphs of spatial representation.
21. Space syntax merges degree centrality and closenesscentrality by developing concepts of integration and connectivity (Hillier, 1996).
22. This insight provides a potent vantage point for the development of an accessibility tool, particularly in a complex urban system where overlapping movement networks (such as for pedestrians, motor vehicles and off-street public transport) act partially in concert with and partially in competition to each other. 
23. Page 10
24. Bertolini’s ‘node-place model’ notes that while railway stations provide access to the transport network, which he defines as the ‘node’ element in his model, they also offer a ‘place’ function. 
25. A MATRIX OF ACTIVITY NODES 
26. To produce a set of accessibility indicators for a land use–transport system, SNAMUTS assesses the hierarchy of central places in an urban area. 
27. A matrix of central places and nodes is compiled as each potential origin-destination pair is subjected to a GIS-based way-finding procedure. 
28. Page 28
29. MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARD
30. Public transport network elements are included in the analysis where they meet a minimum level of service. 
31. The minimum service standard SNAMUTS uses is flexible in theory. In this book, however, a uniform minimum standard is applied (SNAMUTS 23) in order to maintain the comparability of results across case study cities. This requires a service frequency of 20 minutes (or better) during the weekday inter-peak period (about 10.00 to 15.00 hours) and 30 minutes (or better) during weekend days for surface modes (bus and tram), and a 30-minute frequency on weekdays combined with service seven days a week for segregated rail and ferry modes.
32. STRUCTURAL INDICATORS
33. For each city in the database we present a set of three indicators that serve to position their size, structure and role of public transport in a broader context: the total residential population within the metropolitan area; the average settlement density of the urbanised area in residents and jobs per hectare; and the number of public transport trips per capita per year.
34. SERVICE INTENSITY 
35. This indicator, derived from the network analysis, measures the operational input required to provide the service levels across the system (at the minimum service standard). The number of vehicles for each mode that are in simultaneous revenue service during the weekday inter-peak period is counted. The index is expressed relative to metropolitan population (vehicles or train sets per 100,000 residents). 
36. Page 29
37. This travel impediment measure is calculated separately for each route segment (link between two adjacent nodes) across the network.
38. CLOSENESS CENTRALITY
39. This indicator describes the spatial properties of a public transport system and relates to the metric function of networks (discussed above). It is based on a proxy index for spatial separation, or travel impediment.
40. Service intensity can be interpreted in two ways. Firstly, it illustrates the generosity of an operator to provide resources, and secondly, the efficiency of their deployment. 
41. Closeness centrality is shown as an average value across the network, and as an average for each activity node. Lower values indicate better performance or greater ease of movement.
42. Thus the ratio between service intensity changes and shifts on the accessibility measures (below) can help to determine the efficacy of initia tives to expand/reduce public transport services.
43. Travel time can vary greatly in relation to metric distance, depending on the speed of the service: in many cities, a metro train on a fully segregated alignment can cover a distance of several kilometres in the same time it takes a bus to cover only one kilometre along the streets of a congested central area. 
44. Page 30
45. In a public transport network, the most meaningful way to capture this measure is by counting the number of transfers required to make the journey in question, suggesting that a node has the same degree of connection to all other nodes that are located along the same public transport lines as itself.
46. DEGREE CENTRALITY
47. The second indicator describing the structural network properties takes a topological perspective: measuring the degrees of separation between each pair of nodes.
48. Degree centrality is shown as an average value across the network and as an average for each activity node. Lower values indicate lower transfer intensity. Page 31
49. NETWORK COVERAGE
50. This index illustrates who receives walkable access to public transport and who does not. Walkable catchments around stations and stops1 are superimposed on a land use map and the number of residents and jobs contained within are counted. The proportion of this figure of the metropolitan total provides the network coverage result. It can be read as a proxy for the inclination of city decision-makers to supply public transport services of a certain standard to as large a pool of potential users as reasonably possible.
51. High network coverage can be characterised as a policy goal competing with the quest to simply maximise ridership, given that a limited pool of operational resources can be allocated to enlarge the geographical reach of the network rather than concentrate only on those routes or network segments that offer the greatest potential for patronage or mode share growth (Walker, 2012). 
52. Page 32 
53. THIRTY-MINUTE CONTOUR CATCHMENTS 
54. The contour catchments index adds detail and qualification to the network coverage measure. A proportion of the total figure of metropolitan residents and jobs within walking distance to public transport is allocated by drawing a walkable catchment area specific to each activity node, consisting of the rail station radius (including, where applicable, those of neighbouring smallerstations that do not carry SNAMUTS activity node status in their own right) and/or the linear corridors of surface modes converging in the activity node.
55. Boundaries with neighbouring activity node catchments along these corridors are determined by geographical barriers such as watercourses, or administrative borders, or simply set at the geometrical halfway point.
56. Page 34
57. Each of these paths is then weighted by two measures: First, the number of residents and jobs in the catchment area of the activity nodes at either end, following a logic of agglomeration where larger activity centres generate more travel opportunities between them than smaller ones. Second, a weighting for the travel impediment associated with the path is used, following a logic of gravity where activity centres within easy reach of each other generate more travel opportunities between them than those more remote to each other.
58. BETWEENNESS CENTRALITY
59. This index offers an image of the movement opportunities derived from the spatial distribution of land uses on the one hand, and the configuration and service levels of the public transport network on the other hand. The most attractive travel path between each pair of nodes is traced through all the intermediate network elements (nodes and route segments) passed along the journey. The most attractive or preferred path is determined by a synthesis of the approaches used in the closeness and degree centrality indexes (out of the path with the lowest cumulativetravel impediment and the path with the lowest number of transfers): the path with the lower overall travel time (including transfers) is selected. 
60. Page 37
61. SEGMENTAL AND NETWORK RESILIENCE
62. The relationship between the supply side measure of betweenness centrality and actual, observed public transport usage can be complex. Without easy access to detailed, route and location specific usage data it is difficult to explore empirically. An alternative is to draw a ratio between the results of the segmental betweenness index and the actual passenger capacity offered on each route segment, measured in comfortable places per hour.2
63. Page 38
64. NODAL CONNECTIVITY 
65. This index measures the strength of each activity node for integration of multimodal public transport services, and by extension, the flexibility of usersto move around the city on public transport. It captures the suitability of activity nodes for making transfers or breaks of journey with minimal disruption to the flow of movement. 
66. Page 307
67. The SNAMUTS accessibility indicators link to a range of policy questions that planners and community members may ask. Closeness centrality is the indicator that responds to the question – ‘how quickly (on average) can I navigate my city by public transport’? 
68. Degree centrality enables interrogation of – ‘how many transfers (on average) do I have to make in order to access my city’ – taking into account the legibility of the network (its hierarchy) and the convenience.
69. We have demonstrated how it is possible to compare accessibility within a city and also between cities. In this way there is a clear strategic overview. 
70. Page 308
71. Network density and multidirectionality are critical. The whole city should aspire to a network comprising a mix of radial, orbital and diagonal elements to create lattice or spiderweb network shapes. These networks provide for easy multi-directional movement by public transport. For network density, it is specifically the intersection or transfer point density that is critical. For example, inner Adelaide and inner Vienna both have 100 per cent network coverage, but Vienna offers multiple public transport choices in walking distance, while Adelaide generally only offers one. 
72. The idea of a benchmark can be seen from two dimensions: as a reference against which things can be compared – so how do public transport systems of international cities compare; and as a standard of excellence – so which cities can be seen as best practice as regards public transport accessibility.