---
Title: 			Activity patterns, time use, and travel of millennials A generation in transition? 
Author:			Garikapati
Year:			2016
Added in:		2021-12-06
tag:			Article
fullref: 		"Garikapati, V. M., Pendyala, R. M., Morris, E. A., Mokhtarian, P. L., & McDonald, N. (2016). Activity patterns, time use, and travel of millennials: a generation in transition? Transport Reviews TA  - TT  -, 36(5), 558–584. https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2016.1197337 LK  - https://concordiauniversity.on.worldcat.org/oclc/6286835213"
status:			Extracted

---

# Activity patterns, time use, and travel of millennials: a generation in transition?  
```ad-quote
Garikapati, V. M., Pendyala, R. M., Morris, E. A., Mokhtarian, P. L., & McDonald, N. (2016). Activity patterns, time use, and travel of millennials: a generation in transition? Transport Reviews TA  - TT  -, 36(5), 558–584. https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2016.1197337 LK  - https://concordiauniversity.on.worldcat.org/oclc/6286835213
```
### Author's keywords
- [[millennials]]
- [[activity-time use patterns]]
- [[travel behaviour]]
- [[ cohort analysis]]
- [[age effects]]
- [[trend analysis]]
- [[longitudinal analysis]]
- [[ lifecycle stages]]
### Concepts
- [[generational change]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
## Tags
#tag

```ad-abstract
Millennials, defined in this study as those born between 1979 and 2000, became the largest population segment in the United States in 2015. Compared to recent previous generations, they have been found to travel less, own fewer cars, have lower driver’s licensure rates, and use alternative modes more. But to what extent will these differences in behaviour persist as millennials move through various phases of the lifecycle? To address this question, this paper presents the results of a longitudinal analysis of the 2003–2013 American Time Use Survey data series. In early adulthood, younger millennials (born 1988–1994) are found to spend significantly more time in-home than older millennials (born 1979–1985), which indicates that there are substantial differences in activity-time use patterns across generations in early adulthood. Older millennials are, however, showing **activity-time use patterns** similar to their prior generation counterparts as they age, although some differences – particularly in time spent as a car driver – persist. Millennials appear to exhibit a lag in adopting the activity patterns of predecessor generations due to delayed lifecycle milestones (e.g. completing their education, getting jobs, marrying, and having children) and lingering effects of the economic recession, suggesting that travel demand will resume growth in the future. 
```

## Bullet points
1. In view of the unique traits exhibited by millennials thus far, transportation planning professionals are grappling with understanding how travel demand will evolve in the future as millennials age, and the consequent implications for transport infrastructure investment and policy formulation. There is therefore considerable interest in quantifying and tracking the activity, travel, and time use patterns of millennials. It is well documented that millennials, largely born and raised in an era of ubiquitous technology (“digital natives”), are exhibiting mobility patterns that are different from those of their predecessor cohorts (Dutzik, Inglis, & Baxandall, 2014). They have been found to exhibit lower rates of driver’s licensure (Delbosc & Currie, 2013; Sivak & Schoettle, 2011, 2012), have lower rates of car ownership, and undertake fewer trips and travel fewer miles and minutes on a daily basis (McDonald, 2015; Polzin, Chu, & Godfrey, 2014).
2. In light of the dearth of longitudinal studies on the activity and time use patterns of millennials that effectively isolate cohort and ageing effects, this paper aims to present an in-depth analysis of trends in activity and time use for different age groups and generations.
3. The scope of this paper is limited to the analysis of trends within the 11-year time span of the ATUS (2003–2013) data series. As such, it is not possible to unravel longer-term trends in activity and time use patterns; thus while the analysis is able to provide initial insights into changes in millennial activity-time patterns over time, only future waves of the ATUS data can truly provide confirmatory evidence on the patterns of change in millennial activity-time use trends as they age into advanced lifecycle stages.
4. While the 11-year time span of the ATUS data series is short enough that there are unlikely to be any fundamental structural differences in societal form and function, the severe recession, the rapid evolution of technology, and the growth in the sharing economy and social media platforms experienced within this time span are likely to contribute to period effects. The analysis in this paper is unable to isolate such period effects, but differences in activity-time use patterns and trends are discussed in the context of potential period effects that may be at play.
5. While many of the headlines suggest the dawn of a new era with the emergence of the millennial generation, several key questions remain unanswered. There are the beginnings of a recognition that lifestyles and patterns of behaviour may not necessarily be all that different in the future as millennials age. The zipcar® annual millennial survey suggests that being a “millennial” is related to where an individual lives (the contextual situation) as opposed to when the individual was born (Wester, 2015; zipcar, 2015). It appears that millennials may not be all that different from prior generations in terms of their motivations and desires in the workplace (Biro, 2014).
6. The data for this study is derived from the 2003–2013 ATUS data series. The survey is administered annually to a representative sample of individuals aged 15 years and above to obtain detailed information about household and person-level socio-economic and demographic characteristics, and out-of-home and in-home activity engagement and time use patterns for a one-day study period. In this research effort, data were combined for three pairs of neighbouring years, namely, 2003–2004, 2007–2008, and 2012–2013, to perform a trend analysis.
7. The sample is uniformly distributed across all days of the week in each survey year, thus allowing comparisons across years without the prevalence of day-of-week effects. All of the analysis was performed on weighted samples; unweighted sample sizes are furnished in the tables for informational purposes.
8. The average total time (per day) that respondents spend alone shows a slight increase over time, and this trend is accompanied by a decrease in time spent with household members. The time spent with spouse shows a decreasing trend for the population as a whole; this trend is explained by the lower share of households with spouses over time as millennials experience lifecycle milestones (such as marriage) later in life than previous generations, and as they constitute an increasing share of the adult population in the United States. However, when only the subsample of households that includes a spouse is considered, the trend is reversed (albeit modestly) with a gradual increase in time spent with spouse across the survey years. This increase is consistent with the fact that the share of households with children present is decreasing over time. This decreasing trend stems from two possible sources: first, increasing numbers of baby boomers are joining the ranks of the retired and become empty nest households, and second, millennials, who constitute an increasing share of the adult population over time, are delaying having children.
9. Before presenting trends in activity-time use patterns for various cohorts, trends in socio-economic and demographic characteristics are examined first. Through an understanding of differences in trends in socio-economic characteristics across generational cohorts, it is possible to identify the socio-economic and demographic phenomena at play that may be contributing to differences in activity-time use patterns.
10. The amount of time spent caring for household members is settling at just over one hour per day. Consistent with the finding that a smaller share of millennials reside in households with a spouse or children in their late 20s/early 30s (as seen in Table 3), this cohort spends comparatively less time caring for household members than GenX individuals; the difference is not, however, statistically significant – indicating a pattern of convergence in time allocation to household member care. Similar convergent trends can be seen for time allocation to socialising and relaxation, eating and drinking, and sports, exercise, and recreation activities. Millennials spend less time caring for non-household members and engaging in other activities in their late 20s/early 30s when compared with GenX individuals; however, the differences are not statistically significant, once again signifying a converging trend in activity-time use patterns.
11. The generation that depicts remarkably different patterns in activity location is the younger millennial cohort born between 1988 and 1994. In total, younger millennials 18–24 years old are spending 40 more minutes at home per day than the older millennials did when they were 18–24 years old. It is unclear whether younger millennials will also begin to converge to the activity-time use patterns of prior generations as they age, as the older millennials are. The statistics suggest that millennials have a different starting point at young adulthood, 18–24 years, in terms of their activity and travel choices, and these differences slowly fade as they age (as seen in Figure 1, and Tables 4 and 5).
12. Based on the trends reported in this paper, transportation planning professionals should not expect a fundamental shift in travel demand in the future. Millennials are often touted as the generation that will bring about transformative changes in the transport sector.
13. Given these findings, transportation planning efforts should aim to design urban spaces and modal alternatives that leverage and sustain the differences seen in young adulthood into the latter stages of life as much as possible. This involves a thoughtful design of urban spaces where young adults experience and enjoy a sense of place consistent with the needs of a maturing household. Green spaces for children to play, urban gardens, safe neighbourhoods to walk and bicycle, a variety of affordable housing options that meet the demands of a growing family, highquality educational institutions, and retail and recreational opportunities that are easily accessible are likely to constitute a built environment that retains millennials and sustains their less-car-oriented activity-travel patterns over longer periods of time, even after they have married and had children. In addition, even though millennials may age to be increasingly similar to their predecessor generations, there will always be new young adults in subsequent generations (Generation Z and beyond) that may exhibit traits similar to the millennials of today, and/or distinctive new traits of their own.
14. In the transport modelling arena, activity-travel demand forecasting models supporting transportation planning processes often use income and vehicle ownership as segmentation variables (to recognise differences in behavioural patterns across socio-economic segments). Given the unique traits of millennials in their early adult years, and the desire to sustain their traits over an extended period of time, it may behoove the profession to consider using the generational cohort as a segmentation variable instead of or in addition to existing segmentation variables. By isolating and modelling the travel patterns of each generation separately over time, it will be possible to plan transport infrastructure investments, design modal options, and formulate land use policies that cater to the needs of the disparate generations.