---
Title: 			Transit-oriented development: A review of research achievements and challenges
Author:			Ibraeva, et. al.
Year:			2020
Added in:		2022-01-03
tag:			Article_
fullref: 		"Ibraeva, A., Correia, G. H. de A., Silva, C., & Antunes, A. P. (2020). Transit-oriented development: A review of research achievements and challenges. Transportation Research Part A TA  - TT  -, 132, 110–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2019.10.018 LK  - https://concordiauniversity.on.worldcat.org/oclc/8324355322"
status:			Analyzed

---

# Transit-oriented development: A review of research achievements and challenges 
```ad-quote
Ibraeva, A., Correia, G. H. de A., Silva, C., & Antunes, A. P. (2020). Transit-oriented development: A review of research achievements and challenges. Transportation Research Part A TA  - TT  -, 132, 110–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2019.10.018 LK  - https://concordiauniversity.on.worldcat.org/oclc/8324355322
```
### Author's keywords
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
### Concepts
- [[transit oriented development]]
- [[literature review]]
- [[transit]]
- [[]]
## Tags
#EXAM_3 

```ad-abstract
Among the attempts made worldwide to foster urban and transport sustainability, transit-oriented development (TOD) certainly is one of the most successful. Since the TOD concept appeared in the late 1980s, it has received increasing attention from researchers and practitioners as a way to merge together transport engineering and planning, land-use planning, and urban design for providing comprehensive solutions to contemporary urban problems. This attention has notably led to the publication of over 300 articles explicitly concerned with TOD in Web of Science journals, as well as to many implementations of the concept, some already completed and others underway (as, for example, the Grand Paris Project in France and Moscow Central Circle in Russia). Essentially, TOD can be described as land-use and transport planning that makes sustainable transport modes convenient and desirable, and that maximizes the efficiency of transport services by concentrating urban development around transit stations. However, as TOD projects started to be implemented worldwide, it became evident that their outcomes could be quite diverse, revealing that in practice the results of a project would depend on a wide variety of factors, trends and complex interrelations between them. In this article, we aim to provide a comprehensive, systematic and up-to-date review of TOD research achievements and challenges. We start by presenting the TOD concept, framing it in the theory of urban planning, and by describing the different typologies of TOD proposed in the literature. Then, we review the vast research dedicated to the study of TOD effects, distinguishing impacts on travel behavior, real-estate prices, residential location, urban form, and community life. The next subject we look at is TOD planning, focusing separately on policy issues and decision-support tools. In the final part of the article, based on the analysis of previous literature, we identify the main gaps and challenges that TOD research needs to address in the future.
```

## Bullet points
1. · …exploring [[transit oriented development|transit-oriented development]] ([[transit oriented development|TOD]]) appears to be promising: even though several of its principles had been applied in the early post-war years in Denmark and Sweden, the very idea of TOD only became conceptualized in the late 1980 s, making it a relatively new notion in urban planning. Inspired by classic concepts like the [[Garden City]] and the [[Linear City]], TOD proposes to organize settlements around transit nodes as centers of urban life and in a certain way reverse our cities back to transit after the post-war decline…
2. Analyzing the 330 articles registered in the Web of Science until the end of 2018 …, it is evident that the vast majority of research on the subject of TOD originates from the USA,… In Europe, TOD research is mostly present in Dutch universities,… in the Asia-Pacific region, notably in Beijing
3. University and in the Universities of Hong Kong, Melbourne, and Queensland. Overall, it is clear that, despite the unquestionable preponderance of the USA on this matter, TOD-related studies are becoming internationally widespread.
4. The concept of TOD was then introduced by architect and urban planner **Peter Calthorpe**, who, in his book The Next American Metropolis, urged for planning for pedestrians and transit, “not to eliminate the car, but to balance it” (**Calthorpe, 1993**). His ideas were closely associated with the notion of “pedestrian pocket” (a neighborhood layout which facilitates walking trips, offering a variety of available routes and shortening travel times for pedestrians) introduced a few years earlier.
5. Calthorpe specifically defined TOD as a “mixed-use community within average 2000-foot [AN: 600 m] walking distance of a transit stop and core commercial area. TODs mix residential, retail, office, open space, and public uses in a walkable environment, making it convenient for residents and employees to travel by transit, bicycle, foot, or car”.
6. Additionally, a “secondary area” related to TOD might appear at the maximum distance of 1.6 km from the core zone, where low-density housing, vast park areas, schools and other facilities for local community could be placed. The street network of this outer area should secure easy, fast and direct access to the core, especially by bicycle, and provide park-and-ride lots.
7. The idea of TOD was clearly inspired by previous [[urban planning]] concepts, notably the Garden City. As industrialization and first systems of mass transit were expanding in traditional compact cities, cars were still unaffordable to the majority of people.[[trasnit|Public transport]] service was essential for the [[community]], and [[linear urbanization|Linear City]] patterns along tramways or railways were introduced in many cities: Ciudad Lineal in Madrid, streetcar suburbs in the USA, Stalingrad, and Magnitogorsk in the Soviet Union, etc. In contrast, later on, with the proliferation of private cars, scattered forms of settlement became fairly widespread since the 1960 s. Functional segregation was common for these settlements, creating residential neighborhoods and retail or business centers as clusters, interconnected by roads.
8. , in Copenhagen, urban growth concentrated mostly along rail corridors in the absence of better alternatives for commuting as massive motorization had not occurred yet….In Stockholm, rail-based urbanization was facilitated and supported by the city council, which managed to acquire land around the city, giving authorities the freedom to decide upon the organization of new satellite towns…

 - **TOD typologies**
9. **the criteria for evaluation** of a station area involve [[density]], [[diversity]], and [[design]], the [[3Ds]] identified by Cervero and Kockelman (1997) as the main features of a TOD.
10. he best-known approach leading to a TOD typology is the node-place approach (or “model”), developed by Bertolini (1996, 1999). The approach basically translates into an XY-diagram, where the Y-axis represents the accessibility of a node (the “[[node index|node-index]]”, describing the variety and frequency of transit supply) and the X-axis the characteristics of a place (the “[[place index|place-index]]”, describing the functional mix of the station area).
11. [[Balanced stations]] with reasonable transit supply and land-use diversity around stations will appear in the middle of the diagram (with approximately 0.5 for both indexes),
12. Kamruzzaman et al. (2014) proposed a TOD classification and tested whether it reflected the travel behavior observed at the stations. Six indicators were used: public transport accessibility level (PTAL), net residential density, net employment density, land use mix, intersection density, and cul-de-sac density.

- **TOD effects**
11. Allegedly, the quality and configuration of the surrounding built environment exerts influence on travel choices: according to Cervero and Gorham (1995), residents of a **transit-oriented neighborhood commute 1.4–5.1% more by public transport** than those living in a car-oriented neighborhood;
12. A more detailed analysis of TOD effects on travel behavior is provided by Cervero (2007) using data from a one-day travel diary of residents of 26 TOD housing projects in California. Public transport ridership levels in neighborhoods within walking distance (800 m) from a station were compared to those in farther areas, considering heavy rail, light rail, and commuter rail. Attempting to attenuate the influence of self-selection in travel patterns, only interviewees who did not reside in TOD before and whose workplace did not change were selected for the analysis. This group of respondents reported a 4 USD decrease in average daily commute costs and a mean increase in job accessibility of 6.5%. Among residents living at a distance between 800 m and 4.8 km of a station, the share of public transport reached only 7%, while for those living within 800 m the equivalent figure was 27% with 85% of them traveling to the station by non-motorized modes.
13. Proximity to a **TOD was found to increase the probability of walking for non-work trips**, surprisingly, even to food stores (initially, the authors hypothesized that shopping trips are more likely to be made by car than trips to restaurants/coffee shops). In contrast, **higher car ownership rates decreased this probability**.
14. It should be noted that most studies are concerned with the travel choices of TOD residents living within **approximately 800 m from the station**.

- *_Real-estate price effects_*
14. Overall, in theory, proximity to a station and subsequent accessibility benefits should be reflected in the price premium. However,in reality, the relationship between the two factors may not be so straightforward.
15. a study in Atlanta showed that residential property values in immediate metro station areas (**radius of up to 400 m**) are likely to decrease in value due to congestion, noise and potential increase in crime rates, but tend to increase beyond this limit, reaching a maximum at a distance of 1.6–4.8 km, and then decrease again.
16. As **increases in [[TOD housing]] prices are frequently reported, concerns arise that they may repel low-income groups** (potentially more prone to transit use than high-income residents) to settle in TOD areas. In this regard, Renne et al. (2016) analyzed housing expenditures together with transport expenditures in order to understand whether higher housing costs in TOD areas are compensated by transport savings. TOD areas were defined as station areas with a walk score of at least 70 (meaning that most amenities can be reached on foot) and a minimum density of 8 housing units per acre [AN: 4047 square meters].
17. Overall, evidence from other locations also shows that **, in general, proximity to TOD leads to the increase in home prices and that the real-estate market switches towards pedestrian-friendly developments preferably served by transit** (Bartholomew and Ewing, 2011)
18. As stated by Currie and Stanley (2008), a variety of land-uses in TOD can “address problems associated with social exclusion and SC through creating proximate opportunities for access to activities and social networks” [AN: SC denotes social capital]. It is believed that TOD features provide favorable conditions for vivid street life, hence neighborhood community links should naturally follow. Despite research on this topic is still limited, there are a few works addressing it (Table 5).
19. A different perspective into the theme was brought by Kahn (2007), who concentrated on **gentrification** trends in TOD areas. Since TOD is likely to provoke a price increase in adjacent properties, there is some concern that low-income residents will be forced to leave an area, ceding it to well-off population groups.

- **TOD planning**
20. Articles that consider TOD in the planning policy context generally address four main topics: policy transferability; expectations and interests of stakeholders (planning authorities, transit agencies and developers); implementation problems and solutions; and value capture mechanisms
21. It is generally understood that TOD implies walkable, pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods with a variety of uses well-served by public transport, yet the problem is to define desirable thresholds for these elements accounting for the specific characteristics of a particular location. In practice, the definition of these thresholds results from the interaction of different stakeholders (notably, planning authorities, transit agencies, and developers), so it is important to analyze their interests and expectations from TOD projects. Overall, involved stakeholders show interest in the TOD concept and acknowledge the potential benefits it may bring, so on a surface TOD seems like a win–win strategy, yet detailed analysis reveals somewhat conflicting interests.

- **TOD research gaps**
22. The majority of studies uses data of TOD residents’ travel choices which inform about the mode choice selected at a particular origin, yet they omit valuable information about the destination of the trips (whether it is easily reachable by car or transit, whether it is a mixed-use or a mono-functional site, etc.).

23. Another common criticism of existing research is the focus on work trips and little interest in non-work trips which can account for several daily trips. In this regard, estimation of a site’s attractiveness based on the number of jobs is sometimes considered as an oversimplification, since the distribution of activities that attract people is not necessarily limited to employment centers, especially in non-working hours (examples include schools, restaurants, bars, cultural venues, etc.). Research involving non-work trips is frequently entangled with limited data availability, but is certainly worth pursuing because the share of such trips is increasingly large.

24. It should be noted that current TOD typologies have been defined mainly for diagnostics purposes, revealing clusters with similar characteristics or problems on a metropolitan scale. However, the results do not seem to be used during the planning process, highlighting a gap between existing theoretical classifications and actual planning practice. More research is needed to see which typologies are useful and helpful in the planning process of site selection (for development or transport service) and land-use allocation.
