---
Title: 			The high street as a morphological event
Author:			Griffiths
Year:			2015
Added in:		2022-05-20
tag:			Article_
group:			Group1
fullref: 		"Griffiths, S. (2015). The high street as a morphological event. In L. Vaughan (Ed.), Suburban urbanities: Suburbs and the life of the high street (pp. 32–50). UCL Press London. https://doi.org/10.14324/111.9781910634134"
status:			Need to extract

---

# Tittle 
```ad-quote
Griffiths, S. (2015). The high street as a morphological event. In L. Vaughan (Ed.), Suburban urbanities: Suburbs and the life of the high street (pp. 32–50). UCL Press London. https://doi.org/10.14324/111.9781910634134
```
### Author's keywords
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
### Concepts
- [[high street|High Street]]
- [[hiilier]]
- [[urban morphology]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
## Tags
#BookChapter

```ad-abstract
The high street has long been a near ubiquitous feature of British towns, cities and suburbs. The dual role of high streets as signifiers of communal identity and as subsidiary nodes in economic topography means a comprehensive account must contend with both the tangibility of what high streets do in socio-economic terms, as well as the intangibility of what they mean to local people. Acknowledging both these qualities, the approach taken here is to frame the traditional British high street as a phenomenon exhausted neither by the metrics of central place analysis nor by its representation in popular culture, whether as a metaphor for the retail sector as a whole or as a (quite possibly the) dominant urban trope in stories aimed at very young children. rather, it is claimed that the high street requires serious conceptualisation as a distinctive mode of social time–space organisation that in many cases emerged historically and in relation to persistent morphological structures that might pre-date the built environment itself.
```

## Bullet points
1. Page 2
2. The high street therefore appears here as a key site for the realisation and perpetuation of locality, not least through the ongoing local negotiation of social change. In proposing the high street as a site through which community is performed rather than operationalised and represented, the intention is to contribute to the lively debate about the future of a very familiar but also poorly understood feature of the British built environment.
3. Page 3
4. A body of empirical work, ... These studies highlight the capacity of high streets and their environs to sustain a broad base of socio-economic, cultural and community activities. ...suburbs tend to be extensions to historically nucleated settlements. 
5. Page 4
6. It would clearly be erroneous to assert that the high street describes some kind of universal condition of life in the built environment. Indeed, the high street (in the sense of the main shopping street) has a number of different histories.
7. Page 5
8. The high street as a site of historical continuity with a capacity for negotiating social change in a local context is insufficiently addressed on the conceptual level by accounts organised by the conventional periods of social history, since the built environment history of the high street typically extends beyond these. This argument is consistent with historical–geographical accounts that note how many suburban high streets emerged in an unplanned way along roads that connected to the original marketplace or centre of the nucleated settlement (Griffiths et al. 2010).
9. Page 6
10. The point that the historical maps are intended to illustrate is how historical road networks might be described as significant ‘morphological events’, that is, as spatial entities that continue to happen.
11. Page 9
12. Unlike the practice of scholarly history, which develops the intellectual methods needed to recover the past, these photo-montages highlight the possibility of a more spontaneous, everyday sense of temporality through which the past permeates the present. ...research done by the Adaptable Suburbs project at UCL has shown how both building stock and land uses have continually adapted to each other in London’s outer suburbs over the past century, while maintaining a great deal of continuity overall (Vaughan et al. 2015; Vaughan in this volume). For example, the data shows how successive historical periods witnessed the expansion of ‘third place’ locations, that is, places of social meeting and interaction that are neither places of home nor work (Oldenburg 1997).
13. Page 10
14. Co-presence for Hillier, therefore, refers to the possibility of social interaction, not an actual social interaction. He has in mind the sense an urban walker might have that one area is likely to be occupied by ‘locals’ while another is likely to be more socially heterogeneous, or that a certain street feels ‘unsafe’ because it is likely to be empty while another feels safer because it is likely to be busy. Yet, it is argued, there is a missing element in Hillier’s theory, namely an acknowledgement that the temporal intuition of co-presence is no less necessary than spatial intuition to the notion of the virtual community – for example, the sense that people were here yesterday and are likely to come again tomorrow. This temporalised notion of virtual community helps us to understand the high street as a source of communal continuity.
15. Page 11
16. Acknowledging temporal offsetting forces a reconsideration of the traditional ‘palimpsest’ analogy of urban form, which all too easily reduces the overlapping temporal trajectories at play into equivalent ‘layers’ integrated into a GIS platform – note the problem here is not with the method as such but with the conceptualisation of time it enforces. Certainly the historical and design disciplines tend to converge on issues of ‘preservation’, ‘conservation’ and ‘heritage’ rather than the exploration of design possibilities as such. Yet a more sophisticated articulation of built-environment ‘diachromesh’ – Corfield’s (2007) term for the interlocking of different temporal scales or ‘frames’ – could reveal the historical potential of a high street to generate patterns of social co-presence, encounter and engagement in relation to an expanded range of normative agendas and design scenarios. ... we should take seriously the question of its temporal framing,... In the extended temporal frame that the built-environment history of the high street requires, contemporary problems can be properly contextualised as a particular phase in an ongoing history, rather than as a relic worthy of preservation. Acknowledging this might enable designers and policy makers to focus more clearly on the generative qualities of the high street as a source of social life. .... in Durkheimian terms: to produce a social energy. A..concentration on short-term concerns risks allowing the potential of high streets for self-regeneration to be overlooked.
17. Page 12
18. Hanson’s intensive analytical work on the historical grid of the city notes the continuing importance of the Newgate–Cheapside axis and the contours of the roman wall in the history of the City of London over two millennia.
19. The dynamic relationship between the network and events arises from the nature of the urban interface – which serves to bring people together and keep them apart in different ways, consistent with the social mores of a given period. Hanson argues that her analysis ‘lends a new meaning to conservation: that of conservation through morphology’ (Hanson 1989a: 398) Her priority to note the distinction between morphological history (as structure) and morphological events (as ordering) compromises this task since, I would argue, her analytical emphasis has the secondary effect of over-differentiating between the ‘deep’ synchronic structures of morphological history accessible through formal analysis and the social history of (diachronic) morphological ‘events’.
20. Page 13
21. Methods of spatial analysis necessarily shoehorn our thinking into layers, yet conceptually this ‘flattening’ should be resisted since Hanson’s proposition of the urban grid as a form of historical memory necessarily invokes the temporal dimension.6 Braudel famously divided historical narrative into three temporalities: environmental history – ‘a history whose passage is almost imperceptible’; social history – ‘the history of groups and groupings’; and the history of events, which refers to daily life at a scale most comprehensible to the individual (Braudel 1975: 20–1).
22. Page 14
23. Whitehead’s (2006: 90–1) philosophy of science helps to justify a rethinking of the deep network structure of the built environment as a morphological event (and therefore temporal). Whitehead therefore sees no clear distinction between material object and immaterial relation but rather a complex structuring of time–space ‘events’. These events are continually occurring at any number of spatial–temporal scales from those imperceptible to humans – for example, at the atomic level – to those which may be perceived – for example, relations of heat, colour (or even co-presence) – to those belonging to the historical narrative of ‘events’ that might be read about in a newspaper or history book. For Whitehead then, the idea of the ‘event’ articulates something like the world’s ‘temporal grain’ (Carr, referred to in Bentley 2006: 360)
24. Page 15
25. ... complements the spatial notion of the built environment, itself possessing an historical ‘grain’ or ‘tissue’ that becomes the object of conservation (Griffiths et al. 2010). In this sense it is right to speak of ‘temporal intelligibility’ as a built environment quality no less than spatial intelligibility – indeed the two can hardly be separated in perpetuating a sense of locality or ‘place’. The idea of temporal intelligibility proposes a process through which the structure of the urban grid has mnemonic affordance to human beings in time. No more than spatial intelligibility can orientation to temporality be thought of as equivalent to or mappable onto any specific semantic content. ... as Hanson describes them in her case study of the City of London. It has been proposed that the network itself can legitimately be described as an ‘event’, and in that sense an intrinsically temporal phenomenon. Such a network history does not lend itself to metaphors of layers and palimpsests so much as knots in timber that describe processes of growth and decay. Intelligible temporality is not a staccato time-series, nor is it a purely psychological state; rather it is a social state that arises somewhere and some-when and is ongoing until its material conditions cease to exist. This allows us to conceive of ‘temporal co-presence’ – implying what Hillier (1996: 187) might call the ‘raw material’ of social memory – meaning not actual social memories but a quality without which such a notion becomes untenable.
26. Page 17
27. Preferable to ‘node’ is Ethington’s conceptualisation of ‘topoi’ (Ethington 2007). ‘Topoi’, meaning ‘places’ in Greek, is also used in rhetoric to suggest a commonplace or conventional device. For Ethington topoi are the places of past and continuing human action the mapping of which comprises history (2007: 465). Ethington argues that a spatialised notion of topoi is present in Heidegger for whom being in time is always ‘located’ – that is, it takes place somewhere. thington’s conceptualisation of topoi is a powerful argument for the spatiality of history but, lacking Hanson’s distinctive sense of a networked morphological history, his necessary focus on the ‘history of events’ leads him to collapse time absolutely into his spatial cartographic compass. A theoretical difficulty is that he takes a largely phenomenological route to social space via Bergsonian time that tends towards the psychological and aspatial (see Massey 2005), to Heidegger and Edward Casey’s (1997) work on place.A networked approach to topoi
28. Page 18
29. ... makes it possible to dispense with the limitations of the topos – that, as Thrift (2004) points out, imply a static, rather than an enclosed or a background space – and propose, after Hanson, a topoi in which everyday sites of spatial practice are acknowledged as places we keep coming back to – or in the parlance of phenomenology, open places that escape fixed representation and keep becoming. Co-presence as a diachronic as well as a spatial phenomenon might be thought of as reducing, though without entirely collapsing, the temporal distance between a community’s (imagined but not in an arbitrary sense) past, present and future. In this sense, it is proposed, the meaning of the high street is less the point than the affordance it sustains for the social performance of ‘being-in-memory’. The possibility of social memory from this networked perspective is not evenly distributed in urban space but is intensified at particular places where we expect other people to be, to have been or to be in future. A research focus on the quotidian routines of the street plan, such as those that may take place on the high street rather than the semiology of landmark buildings, reveals a fascinating and shifting,...
30. Page 19
31. far from chaotic mix of instrumental and symbolic affordances for social life. As a condition of, rather than simply a repository for, collective memory, they invoke a temporality that is not easily bracketed as ‘the past’ but is open and ongoing, a temporality of historical presence that is re-embodied with each trip to the shops or the doctor’s surgery. Without a theory and method able to give formal description to the non-representational qualities of historical street systems, the temporal and spatial scope of built environment history is likely to be restricted to the conventional brackets of historical context – to the detriment of understanding the everyday built environment of community. ... the social temporality implicit in these networks has been relatively marginalised in space syntax research with its strong analytical focus premised on a privileged observer (see Griffiths 2011). Conceived as a topos in this configurational sense, it is clear how the everyday ‘high street’ touches on fundamental time–space arrangements
32. Page 20
33. There is an important role for architects and urban designers to play in understanding how the complexity of apparently quotidian places such as high streets not only creates conservation responsibilities but also presents opportunities for design that can take this complexity into account. following Hanson, view it as an agent of morphological or network history, a history which touches on the ‘history of events’ by bringing people, development and commercial activity together in ways that are not entirely predictable. By seeking to better understand high streets as loci of continuity and change, particularly suburban high streets in their deep residential hinterlands, it is possible to gain a better sense of their contribution to built environments that are both resilient and adaptive to social change.
