---
Title: 			Urban Morphological Regions  Development of an Idea BT
Author:	Gu
Year: 2019
Added in:		2021-12-06
tag: Article
fullref: "Gu, K. (2019) ‘Urban Morphological Regions: Development of an Idea BT  - J.W.R. Whitehand and the Historico-geographical Approach to Urban Morphology’, in Oliveira, V. (ed.). Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 33–46. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-00620-4_2."
status:			Extracted

---
# Urban Morphological Regions: Development of an Idea BT 
`Gu, K. (2019) ‘Urban Morphological Regions: Development of an Idea BT  - J.W.R. Whitehand and the Historico-geographical Approach to Urban Morphology’, in Oliveira, V. (ed.). Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 33–46. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-00620-4_2.` 

### Author's keywords
- [[-Concepts/urban morphology]]
- [[Urban morphological regions]]
- [[Urban conservation]]
- [[Morphological coding]]
- [[Urban design]]
### Concepts
- [[Conzen]]
### Tags
#Review
#EXAM_1 

## Abstract
The question of how to articulate and represent the structure of the **urban landscape** has long been central to geographical *urban morphology*. Between the late 1950s and the late 1980s, MRG Conzen made a major contribution to the development of morphological regionalisation—the process of identifying and mapping urban morphological regions that is fundamental to the understanding of the structure and change of towns and cities. In the past two to three decades, the scope of research on morphological regionalisation has expanded both geographically, to include studies from diverse cultural regions and, professionally, to demonstrate its significance for planning and urban design. After a review of the origins and development of the idea of urban morphological regions, this chapter focuses on the research contributions by JWR Whitehand and his associates and followers to its recent advancement. Discussion of the concept includes its application and adaptation in different cultural regions and its potential and challenges in urban conservation. More recent explorations aim to extend the application of morphological regionalisation in the development of form-based zoning, urban design guidelines, urban redevelopment management and planning for social inclusion.

## Bullet points
1.   In establishing the basic method of morphological regionalisation and the conceptual framework that underpins it, **Conzen** explored how the ground plan (or town plan) was itself made up of several elements: streets, plots and building block plans. The building form included structure, style and materials. The ground plan provided the framework for the buildings and the land and building utilisation, buildings being the containers of the covered part of the land utilisation.

2. Building forms tend to persist for a lengthy time span, but are more susceptible to adaptation and replacement. The pattern of land and building utilisation is the most subject to change (Conzen 2004, p. 124).

3. Conzen demonstrated, especially in his study of Ludlow, how the way in which the urban landscape is historically stratified gives rise to a hierarchy of morphological regions (Conzen 1968, 1975, 1988, 2004). The initial stages of the method entail creating three maps (Fig. 2.1). These are maps of **plan units** (or **plan-type** areas), **building type** (or **building form and fabric**) and **land utilisation** (including building utilisation).
	1. The map of plan-type areas or plan units shows unitary areas delimited according to their ground plan, comprising site, street layout, plot pattern and building block plans.
	2. The map of building-type areas (building type being the three-dimensional physical form of the buildings) is based on sources similar to those for plan-type areas, with morphological periods being particularly important in categorising building types.

4. Morphological regionalisation is an integrated approach in which emphasis is placed on how the various components of the landscape fit together—the emphasis is on landscapes as integrated entities rather than as remarkable bits and pieces: it is not primarily about individual buildings and sites—it is about ensembles.
5. **JWR Whitehand’s** contribution to the development of the idea of urban morphological regions is part of his wider academic leadership and scholarly achievement, especially in consolidating and promoting urban morphological research.
6. Whitehand’s studies of morphological regionalisation have particularly focused on strengthening morphological research and planning practice, and the cross-cultural application of morphological theory.
7. Whitehand’s research on morphological regionalisation in the following two decades is meticulously summarised in his paper, published in 2009, entitled ‘The structure of urban landscapes: strengthening research and practice’.
8. Whitehand has made it clear that the concept of morphological regions is a complex but important idea in geographical urban morphology, and its formulation and application have entailed much effort in data gathering and analysis.
9. Whitehand argues that Conzen has provided a widely applicable method, but it would be unrealistic to expect this to be developed to the point of allowing patterns of morphological regions to be precisely replicated by different researchers working independently in the same area (Whitehand 2009). Each morphological region tends to be historically influenced in two ways: first, through the environment provided by existing forms, especially their layout; secondly, by the way in which forms, most obviously buildings, though embodying the innovations of their period of construction, also embody characteristics ‘inherited’ from previous generations of forms.
