---
Title: 			The epistemology of urban morphology
Author:			Scheer
Year:			2015
Added in:		2022-08-17
tag:			Article_
group:			group
fullref: 		"Scheer,Brenda Case. (2015). The epistemology of urban morphology. Urban Morphology, _2_, 117–134."
status:			Need to extract
---

# Tittle 
```ad-quote
Scheer,Brenda Case. (2015). The epistemology of urban morphology. Urban Morphology, 2, 117–134.
```
### Author's keywords
- [[urban form]]
- [[epistemology]]
- [[patterns]]
- [[evolution]]
- [[schools of thought]]
### Concepts
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
- [[]]
## Tags
#tag
#EXAM_1 

```ad-abstract
A very broad conceptual diagram of the epistemology of the field of urban morphology is provided as a irst step to illustrating the potential connections between different schools of thought. A study of the methods of generating knowledge in this ield shows that there are many conceptual and methodological practices that are shared. This shared epistemology can become a basis for comparing the kinds of theories and knowledge generated by different schools of thought. The methods used, the bases for judging their validity, and the scope of enquiries are considered. A systematic deinition of the elements that morphologists use for their interpretations is proposed.
```

## Bullet points
1. Page 2
2. In the case of urban morphology, the main epistemological frame work has not been adequately explored. But much is based on measurements and calculations relating to observed physical phenomena that tend to be accepted as basic as distinct from inferred.
3. What distinguishes justiied belief (inferred knowledge) from opinion is a question that needs to be addressed. Furthermore, it is necessary to be clear about the kind of knowledge that falls within the purview of urban morphology and how that knowledge is acquired.
4. Page 3
5. There have been many attempts over the years to unite different conceptions of urban morphology, an early one within the history of ISUF being Anne Vernez Moudon’s article in the first issue of Urban Morphology. She identifies three principles on which urban morphological analysis is based.
	1. Urban form is defined by three fundamental physical elements: buildings and their related open spaces, plots or lots, and streets.
	2. Urban form can be understood at different levels of resolution. Commonly, four are recognized, corresponding to the build ing/lot, the street/block, the city, and the region.
	3. Urban form can only be understood his torically, since the elements of which it is comprised undergo continuous transformation and replacement (Moudon, 1997,p. 7).

6. Summarizing Whitehand’s perspective,...the two predominant schools – Italian and English: ‘(1) both were concerned with cities as historical phenomena; (2) both conceptualize these phenomena in a manner and to a degree that contrasts with the dominant descriptive approaches;
7. (3) both recognized cycles in development and focused on periodicities in the creation and adaptation of physical forms; and inally (4) both privileged the predominant forms in the landscape, the huge number of ordinary buildings, rather than the small minority of buildings of architectural distinction.Gauthier and Gilliland (2006) provide another framework for classifying various schools of thought about urban form.
8. They recognize normative – intending to use research as a guide for future plans ‒ and cognitive – intending to use research to describe urban form and its historical change over time.
9. they arrange schools of thought on a continuum from autonomous systems to dependent ones, some schools are more internally directed and others are far more intertwined in relationships with other kinds of analysis.
10. Karl Kropf (2001, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2014) seeks common ground between various conceptions of urban form research, eventually coming down on the built form itself as the potential ‘registration mark’ of different types of urban morphological research (Kropf, 2009). ... he places other potential connections and relationships, including land use, activities and lows, in a different knowledge category.
11. Conzen argued that morphology not only included the formal analysis but also the interpretation of that analysis,
12. Kropf and Malfoy argued for a more contained version of urban morphology, so that it could become a distinct field of knowledge.
13. This difference of opinion essentially relates to the extent to which urban morphology as a distinct category of knowledge is autonomous observation and analysis of formal elements or whether it also includes linking those formal elements to other conditions,
14. Page 4
15. Kropf and Malfroy acknowledge that ‘the built environment is an enormous set of indices of the human activity that created them’ (Kropf and Malfroy, 2013, p. 129).
16. The assumption of this paper is that urban morphology is a distinct ield of knowledge that does not have the ambition of achieving a complete description of the complicated dynamics of the city.
17. Rather, it is concerned with describing, deining and theorizing a single segment of urban knowledge (form and formal change) and suggesting how that knowledge is brought into speciic relationship with other dynamics and conditions in a particular place (including transport, ecology, social and economic conditions, human behaviour, and political agents).
18. Rather, in Moudon’s words, the challenge of urban morphology ‘is to demonstrate the common ways in which cities are built and transformed and to illustrate how the principles of change work in many different contexts’ (Moudon, 1997, p. 9).
19. This epistemology is entirely based on a conception of urban morphology as cognitive knowledge as distinct from presumption.
20. However, the analysis and observations of these researchers forms a basis of knowledge apart from their design work.
21. Epistemologically, all the urban morphology schools of thought share certain methods of acquiring knowledge, analysing it, and validating it. These are (1) collection of formal data about the study area; (2) recognition of common patterns in the study area and across study areas; (3) developing and testing theories of change; and (4) linking the results of the physical analysis to conditions not directly related to urban form (hereafter non- formal conditions).
22. Data collection as basic knowledge
23. As Kropf (2009) suggests, one way in which urban morphology is distinguished from other kinds of urban analyses, is the starting point of acquiring formal urban data.
24. The data used in urban morphology are substantially measurable or mathematically derived from measurements or co- ordinates of built form,
25. Formal data have scale, are associated with a particular date and a particular study area, and can be located geographically.
26. For some studies, data include topography, elevation, slope, and location of waterways.
27. Page 6
28. Data validity is a common concern, so researchers often use comparisons across time and data from different sources to help validation. However, the fact that urban form data are largely objective and measurable helps underpin the validity of the field.
29. Pattern recognition
30. The primary form of knowledge in urban morphology is the recognition of patterns, at different times and across places.
31. However, the pattern recognition in urban morphology that lends itself to more sophisticated knowledge accumulation is abstract, rather than objective, and derived from a comparative analysis of the physical data.
32. Patterns can sometimes be recognized through a computer algorithm, usually by radically minimizing the selected data (Stanilov, 2010). However, the complexity, diversity, volume and interrelationships of most urban form data lead to abstract patterns that may be difficult to capture in an algorithm, at least at present.
33. However, research has shown that humans will find patterns even in random arrangements, which raises the question of their validity and may point to the ultimate importance of pattern recognition derived algorithmically.
34. Patterns may be exclusive to a particular place, but identifying, comparing, and naming those that occur over time and in different places is one of the key aims of urban morphology.
35. Page 8
36. This concept of resolution, relates to another type of pattern recognition: the idea of a hierarchy in urban forms, in which smaller patterns are aggregated to form larger patterns. In a simpliied version of this, the recognized scales are building/plot, street/block, city, and region or territory (Kropf, 2014).
37. Theories of change
38. Having recognized recurrent patterns, some morphologists have developed theories of autonomous change  that are thought to have greater generality.
39. Attempting to catalogue and compare the theories of change that are prevalent in urban morphology is beyond the scope of this paper. Kropf (2001) has provided insightful categorizations of change and more recently Whitehand et al. (2014) have compared change mechanisms across two cultures and across two schools.
40. Theories of autonomous change are quite diverse among the schools, but there are some basic, shared concepts.
41. First, cities are built upon existing forms and by evolving, transforming and dispersing existing forms.
42. Secondly, there are similar dynamic interactions related to the effects of time and resolution that occur across many examples studied, implying that very different conditions can result in similar changes.
43. Thirdly, certain physical forms tend to endure for a longer period of time than others in the same place.
44. Fourthly, the persistence of some forms can retard changes that might happen more quickly if built forms were subject only to the forces of non- formal conditions.
45. Many ideas that may be thought of as ‘competing’ do not actually conlict: it is more that theories of change have different reference points and have not been convincingly linked to one another.
46. Page 9
47. Linkage to non- formal conditions
48. The patterns and changes observed in physical form (whether viewed synchronically or diachronically) have complex causes. The changes that are observed and abstracted in the physical world are commonly related to known historical facts, land uses, population shifts, economic and cultural movements and political inluences in a particular study area, as well as to general and culturally conditioned human behaviour, habits and meaning. These correlations lead us to an understanding of why physical components changed in a particular place.
49. Table 1. Epistemological schema, demonstrated in four different lines of enquiry
50. Page 10
51. A common framework
52. One of the irst steps to inding a common framework is to agree about what are data and what is analysis in our studies.
53. The following general principles about the elements are proposed:
	1. They are universal and always present in a settled place. They can be compared across time and space, as long as reliable sources are available.
	2. They are measurable in physical dimensions, or in relation to dates, or mathematically calculated from measurable data (for example, isovists or density of plots).
	3. They exist objectively. There may be uncertainty about the correctness of any kind of data, but our assumption is that the information gathered represents forms that exist or once existed.
	4. They are co- existent in space.
54. Page 11
55. The three elements
56. The three elements described here vary from the building/plot/street formula that is commonly regarded as the fundamental building block of urban morphology.
57. First, they are intended to be far more inclusive.
58. Secondly, the categorization of these elements is based on the need to easily distinguish one kind of element from another.
59. Three categories have been developed. Built form has substantial reality and is man- made. The boundary matrix, which is defined as the combination of plots and the linear paths of public rights of way,
60. Finally, land is the natural landscape terrain upon which the built form rests.
61. Built form is further broken down in Figure 3, where different kinds of built form are classified. Three general categories are recognized – objects, which are non- occupied constructions; buildings; and infrastructure.
62. The boundary matrix (Figure 3) is perhaps the most overlooked of the three elements, especially by those not familiar with urban morphology’s traditions. The matrix is the subdivision of an area into bounded spaces.
63. The boundary matrix relates to another important distinction: plots, and especially paths, have much greater endurance than buildings, and most theories of change are built upon this recognition.
64. Page 13
65. Land is the inal category of elements. For purposes of urban morphology, the natural vegetation, soils, water bodies and topography are the key data points, although other categories pertaining to the natural landscape may also be important from time to time to describe the form of a city.
66. Conclusion
67. This paper demonstrates that morphologists can compare their contributions to the knowledge base, using a simple epistemological schema.
68. The comparison of the schools under this schema is incomplete in this paper. However, if it could be rigorously pursued, the comparison could begin to provide clarity in relation to the terms and concepts of the ield, without requiring that one or another research technique be brought into conformity.
69. ... using a common framework and deinitions for the primary elements, it would be possible to compare, say, a boundary matrix in the suburbs of the US with the same element in the city centre or in a European city. Clarifying the distinctions between data and patterns allows the comparison and cataloguing of both, perhaps enabling a scientiic renaissance that can increase urban morphology’s influence

