---
Title: 			Space is the machine: A configurational theory of architecture. Space Syntax.
Author:	Hillier
Year:			year
Added in:		2022-08-16
tag:			Book_
fullref: 		"Hillier, B. (2007). Space is the machine: A configurational theory of architecture. Space Syntax."
status:			Extracted
---
# Tittle 
```ad-quote
reference
```
## Concepts
- [[space syntax]]
- [[settlements]]

## Tags
#tag 
#2022-08-16
#EXAM_1 

## Summary
```ad-info
color: 255, 215, 0
title: summary
icon: book


```
## Bullet points
1. architectural theories in the last decades have in general suffered from two debilitating weaknesses. First, most have been strongly normative, and weakly analytic, in that they have been too much concerned to tell designers how buildings and environments should be, and too little concerned with how they actually are. As a result, theories of architecture have influenced our built environment enormously, sometimes for good, sometimes for ill, but they have done little to advance our understanding of architecture.
2. Second, there has been an explosion of the historic tendency to form architectural theories out of ideas and concepts borrowed from other disciplines. As a result, architectural discourse has been dominated by a series of borrowings, first from engineering and biology, then from psychology and the social sciences, then from linguistics and semiology, and most recently of all from literary theory.
3. The aim of this book is to begin the process of remedying this bias towards overly normative theories based on concept borrowing from other disciplines, by initiating the search for a genuinely analytic and internal theory of architecture, that is, one based on the direct study of buildings and built environments, and guided by concepts formed out of the necessities of this study.
4. This book is therefore concerned with what buildings and cities are like, why they are as they are, how they work, how they come about through design, and how they might be different.
5. The argument is that in addition to functioning as bodily protection, buildings operate socially in two ways: they constitute the social organisation of everyday life as the spatial configurations of space in which we live and move, and represent social organisation as physical configurations of forms and elements that we see.
6. The nature of the building as an object itself has complexities which in themselves naturally tend to multifunctionality and diversity of cultural expression. It is only by understanding the complex nature of the building as object that we can begin to understand its natural tendency to multifunctionality. At the most elementary level, a building is a construction of physical elements or materials into a more or less stable form, as a result of which a space is created which is distinct from the ambient space. At the very least then, a building is both a physical and a spatial transformation of the situation that existed before the building was built. p.15
7. When we do this we discover a fact about the spatial layouts of buildings and settlements that is so fundamental that it is probably in itself the key to most aspects of human spatial organisation. This is the simple fact that a pattern of space not only looks different but actually is different when justified from the point of view of its different constituent elements. P.23
8. The most common problem with architectural theories is that they have too often been strongly normative and weakly analytic, that is, it has been too easy to use them to generate designs, but they are too weak in predicting what these designs will be like when built. P.47.
9. What exactly, are theories?
10. How should we go about setting up such a theory? The first step must be to make sure we understand exactly what an analytic theory is. This turns out to be not as easy as looking the word up in a dictionary. Few words are in fact more ambiguous in their origins than ‘theory’. In its ancient Greek origins, the verb theoreein means to be a spectator, and the products of this speculative activity, theoremata, were, not surprisingly, speculations. For Bacon theories were simply errors, the ‘received systems of philosophy and doctrine’, to be replaced in due course by something altogether better.13 This meaning is still reflected in everyday use. In common usage, theories are speculations, of lesser status than facts, at best a temporary fix until the facts are known. A fictional detective with a premature ‘theory’ about a case will almost certainly be shown to be wrong. The expression ‘only a theory’ clearly expects theory not to be eventually supported by ‘facts’, but to be replaced by facts. In these senses, theories embody irremediable uncertainties, and appear to constitute a form of thought whose object is to replace itself with a-theoretical, and therefore secure, knowledge. In complete contrast, in modern science the word ‘theory’ today stands for the deepest level of understanding of phenomena. Successful theories in areas where none had previously prevailed, like evolution theory, are the most epoch making of intellectual events. Conflicts between rival theories of, say, the origins of the universe or the nature of matter, conducted on the obscure battlefields of macro and micro phenomena, are among the epics of the late twentieth-century thought. P. 49
11. Theories are in themselves unobservable and unexperiencable, and this is why in the end even the best and the most durable remain in some sense speculative. P.50
12. A theory, then, is not a list of regularities. Regularities are what theory seeks to explain, but are not in themselves theory. They initiate the search for theory but are not and cannot be its end point. A theory which seeks to ‘explain’ regularities is an entity of an altogether different kind from a list of regularities. P.51
13. We may equally use the property space to formalise the idea that the regularity we see lies not in apparent classes or types of things but sequences of states of things. In this case we ask: when an entity changes on one dimension, does it change in any other? It it does, then the regularity will show itself as a regular pattern in the distribution of entities in the property space. P 51
14. The meaning of the word theory can then be made precise. As we have said, just as the a priori given for the noting of regularities is that we know the difference between order and randomness, the a priori given for taking this into theorisation is that regularity on the surface implies some systemic process below the surface, such that the structure of that system is in some sense invariant. A theory is an attempt to model these invariants in a system of interdependent concepts. A theory is a model because it deals with the way in which things must be interrelated in order to produce the surface phenomena, and abstract because it represents the system by some means other than that of the system itself. P. 54
15. What we are doing is recording phenomena in such a way as to be able to see clearly what we mean by regularities, by translating properties into the dimensions of a coordinate space and locating objects as points within this space so that only the regular properties are represented in what we see. This both seems to be and is a fundamental way — maybe the fundamental way — of rigorously recording similarities and differences, and constant associations between things, within an objective and independent framework. P. 54
16. These techniques have been used over several years for two principle purposes, first to discover how far it was possible to bring to light and subject to rigorous comparative analyses the configurational aspects of space and form in building through which culture is transmitted, and second, through these comparative studies to develop a corpus of material which would permit the gradual development of a general theory of architectural possibility. P. 60
17. Buildings and cities are not crystalline objects, unfolding under the influence only of laws of growth. P.69
18. The essence of the problem is to capture the local-to-global dynamics of architectural and urban systems, that is, to show how the elementary generators, which express the human ability to cognize and structure an immediate spatial reality, unfold into the ramified complexities of large-scale systems. P.69
19. The configurational formalisms proposed here as the basis for non-discursive technique are in some ways much simpler than others proposed for the similar classes of phenomena over the last twenty years. Yet they have proved the most powerful in detecting formal and functional regularities in real systems.P.69
20. This property is that graphs of shapes and spatial layouts are significantly different when seen from different points of view within the graph. This can be demonstrated visually by using the j-graph. P74
21. Thinking of symmetries in terms of points in a shape is useful configurationally, since we may immediately ask what will be the characteristics of jgraphs drawn from each of the  . It is immediately clear that the j-graphs drawn from each of Stewart’s points will be identical, and that this would also be the case for any other comparable set of points which Stewart had selected P74
22. In other words, graph and metric specific distances are not linearly related, so we cannot use one as a proxy for the other P79
23. If the distribution of the various layers of integration in a shape relates to the ways in which we use shapes, then an intriguing possibility might be that it could also be implicated in how we understand shapes. For example, building façades seen as shapes seem capable of being ‘understood’ as communicators of information in some sense. P.85
24. The current preoccupation with ‘place’ seems no more than the most recent version of the urban designer’s preference for the local and apparently tractable at the expense of the global and intractable in cities. However, both practical experience and research suggest that the preoccupation with local place gets priorities in the wrong order. Places are not local things. They are moments in large-scale things, the large-scale things we call cities. Places do not make cities. It is cities that make places. The distinction is vital. We cannot make places without understanding cities. Once again we find ourselves needing, above all, an understanding of the city as a functioning physical and spatial object. P.112
25. There are two such great anomalies in our current ways of seeing cities. The first is the problem of multifunctionality. Every aspect of the spatial and physical configuration of the city form seems to have to work in many different ways — climatically, economically, socially, aesthetically, and so on — with the additional difficulty that form changes only slowly while function changes rapidly. The second is the part-whole problem, or as some might prefer, the place-city problem, that is, the fact that in most cities made up of parts with a strong sense of local place it is almost impossible to make a clear morphological distinction between one part and another, at least not at the level at which it could inform design. P. 113
26. The principal generator of the theory set out here is the discovery, through recent research, that the structure of the urban grid considered purely as a spatial configuration, is itself the most powerful single determinant of urban movement, both pedestrian and vehicular. Because this relation is fundamental and lawful, it has already been a powerful force in shaping our historically evolved cities, by its effect on land-use patterns, building densities, the mixing of uses in urban areas and the part-whole structure of the city.4 P. 113
27. Space is a shape, and function is what we do in it. P114
28. There are relationships, then, between the formal describability of space and how people use it. These elementary relationships between the form of space and its use suggest that the proper way to formulate the relation is to say that space is given to us as a set of potentials, and that we exploit these potentials as individuals and collectivities in using space. It is this that makes the relation between space and function analysable, and to some extent predictable. P115
29. What is it like to move around in it? Does it have potential to generate interaction? Can strangers understand it? and so on. All these questions are about the relationship of space as formal potentials to different aspects of function. A layout can thus be represented as a different kind of spatial system according to what aspects of function we are interested in. P116
30. Which then is primary? Let us argue this through the spatial distribution of retail, the commonest non-residential land use. We may already have been suspected of having confused the effects of spatial configuration on movement with the effect of shops. Are not the shops the main attractors of movement? And do they not lie on the main integrators? This is of course true. But it does not undermine what is being said about the structure of the grid as the prime determinant of movement. On the contrary it makes the argument far more powerful. Both the shops and the people are found on main integrators, but the question is: why are the shops there? The presence of shops can attract people, but they cannot change the integration value of a line, since this is purely a spatial measure of the position of the line in the grid. It can only be that the shops were selectively located on integrating lines, and this must be because they are the lines which naturally carry the most movement. P125
31. It is being suggested that there is an underlying principle which, other things being equal, relates grid structure to movement pattern not only on the main lines in and out of a city, but also in the fine structure, and through this gives rise to a whole multiplicity of inter-relationships between grid structure, land uses, densities, and even the sense of urban well-being and fear. P125
32. Location in the grid therefore has a crucial effect. It either increases or diminishes the degree to which movement by-product is available as potential contact. As we saw in the coloured-up maps, this applies not only to individual lines, but to the groups of lines that make up local areas. Thus there will be more integrating and less integrating areas, depending on how the internal structure of the area is married into the larger-scale structure of the grid, and this will mean also areas with more by-product and areas with less. P 126
33. It means that under certain conditions of density and integration of the grid structure things can happen that will not happen elsewhere. Movement is so central to this process that we should forthwith cease to see cities as being made up of fixed elements and movement elements and instead see the physical and spatial structure as being bound up to create what we have called the ‘movement economy’, in which the usefulness of the by-product of movement is everywhere maximised by integration in order to maximise the multiplier effects which are the root source of the life of cities. P127
34. Urbanity, we suggest, is not so mysterious. Good space is used space. P 127
35. The urban movement economy, arising from the multiplier effect of space, depends on certain conditions: a certain size, a certain density, a certain distribution of land uses, a specific type of grid that maintains the interface between local and global, and so on. Once this is spelled out, it is easy to see how thoroughly some of our recent efforts have disrupted it, so much so that we must think of many developments of recent years as exercise in the spatial techniques of disurbanism. P131
36. These ‘disurban’ places arise from a poorly structured local configuration of space as a consequence of which the main elements of the movement economy are lost. A similar pattern of loss can also arise through dispersion. If we move from an urban system that is dense and nucleated to one that is dispersed and fragmentary, it is obvious that the mean length of journeys will, other things being equal, increase. It is less obvious, but equally true, that the by-product effect will also be diminished. P134
37. A similar effect can arise even in a comparatively dense urban system through an urban design policy of replacing continuous urban structure with specialised enclaves. This will also tend to eliminate by-product. Enclaves are, almost by definition, destinations which are not available for natural movement. P134
38. These arguments suggest that the culturally sanctioned values that are embedded in attitudes towards urban design, that until quite recently were taken for granted — lowering densities wherever possible, breaking up urban continuity into well-defined and specialised enclaves, reducing spatial scale, separating and restricting different forms of movement, even restricting the ability to stop travellers from moving and taking advantage of the by-product effect — are fundamentally inimical to the natural functioning of the city and its movement economy. P134
39. These conclusions can only reinforce the thought with which we began: our interventions in the city can only be based on our understanding of the city.P135
40. It is most easily explained through the geographer Richard Wagner’s distinction between two kinds of energy-related artefact: implements which transmit or accelerate kinetic energy, and facilities which store up potential energy and slow down its transfer.15 P135
41. What made towns possible socially was an invention we are so familiar with that we tend to take it for granted and forget it is there: the urban grid. The urban grid is the organisation of groups of contiguous buildings in outward-facing, fairly regular clumps, amongst which is defined a continuous system of space in the form of intersecting rings, with a greater or lesser degree of overall regularity. Urban grids were never inevitable. In fact, the archaeological record reveals many proto-towns with quite different morphologies. P135
42. It is exactly this finer level of resolution of both architectural and social data that can be achieved and made systematic by using configurational modelling of space, as the basic means for controlling the architectural variable. This allows parametric descriptors of spaces to be assigned at whatever level of resolution we choose. We have already seen that configurational properties of spaces are crucial to the ways in which space ‘works’ at the level of patterns of movement, and the knock-on effects these have over time on other aspects of urban form which are sensitive to movement, such as the distribution of certain types of land use, such as retail, and some types of crime, as well as the fear of crime. P140
43. Morphogenetic models
44. …..In such a model, rules and randomness can interact to produce not only known outcomes, but also new outcomes or morphogenesis. Cases were shown in which a morphogenic model based on cell aggregations randomised apart from purely local rules (i.e. specifying only relations of cells to an immediate neighbor) was able to generate — and by direct inference to ‘explain’ something about — common global topological properties of groups of apparently random settlement forms.7…..
45. ….The higher the proportion of possible spatial relations specified by the rules, and the more global those rules, the less the process has morphogenetic potential, and the more it will conserve the form given by the rules. Conversely, the lower the proportion of possible relations specified by rules, the greater the morphological potential.  P192
46. The limiting case of such a non-interchangeable system is one in which every cell has a specified relation to all others in the system. This limit seems to be approached in the famous case of the Bororo village used (though not originated) by Lévi-Strauss.8
47. The continuum of long and short models is, we believe, the general form of Lévi-Strauss’ distinction between mechanical (long) and statistical (short) models. Unifying both into a single scheme of things, one is able to see that the statistical and the mechanical, while appearing to characterise quite different research approaches to human affairs (in that sociology tends to the statistical while anthropology tends to the mechanical), are in fact aspects of an underlying continuum of possibility that runs right through human affairs in all societies.P 193
